---
layout: blog
title: Berlin and Stuttgart say hello to Infinispan
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/berlin-and-stuttgart-say-hello-to
date: '2009-07-20T09:33:00.000-07:00'
author: msurtani
tags: [ "JUGs", "jclouds" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-4238724694797883834
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2009/07/berlin-and-stuttgart-say-hello-to.html
---
http://justinmcroberts.files.wordpress.com/2008/09/bullhorn.jpg[image:http://justinmcroberts.files.wordpress.com/2008/09/bullhorn.jpg[image]]
Last week I finally put together my presentation on cloud computing and
Infinispan. To kick things off, I presented it at two JUG events in
Germany.

Berlin's http://www.jug-bb.de/[Brandenburg JUG] organised an event at
the http://www.newthinking-store.de/[NewThinking Store] in Berlin's
trendy http://wikitravel.org/en/Berlin/Mitte[Mitte] district. Thanks to
Tobias Hartwig and Ralph Bergmann for organising the event, which drew
an audience of about 35 people. Cloud computing was the focus of the
evening, and I started the event with my rather lengthy presentation on
cloud computing and specific issues around persisting data in a cloud.
The bulk of the presentation focused on Infinispan, what it provides as
a data grid platform, and what's on the roadmap. After a demo and a
short break, Infinispan committer Adrian Cole then spoke about
http://code.google.com/p/jclouds/[JClouds], demonstrating Infinispan's
use of JClouds to back cached state onto Amazon's S3. You can read more
about Adrian's presentation on
http://anyweight.blogspot.com/2009/07/double-feature-in-mitte.html[his
blog].

Two days later, the http://www.jugs.org/[Stuttgart JUG] arranged for me
to speak to their http://www.jugs.org/sig-jboss.html[JBoss Special
Interest Group] on Infinispan. Thanks to Tobias Frech and
http://pilhuhn.blogspot.com/[Heiko Rupp] for organising this event,
which was held in one of Red Hat's training rooms in Stuttgart. The
presentation followed a similar pattern to what was presented in Berlin,
to an audience of about 15 people.

In both cases, there was an overwhelming interest in Infinispan as a
distributed storage engine. The
https://jira.jboss.org/jira/browse/ISPN-24[JPA interface] which is on
our roadmap generated a lot of interest, as did the
https://jira.jboss.org/jira/browse/ISPN-32[query API] and to a lesser
extent the https://jira.jboss.org/jira/browse/ISPN-72[asynchronous API]
- which could benefit from a better example in my presentation to
demonstrate why this really is a powerful thing.

Overall, it is good to see that folks are interested in and are aware of
the challenges involved in data storage on clouds, where traditional
database usage is less relevant.

Many people have asked me for downloadable versions of my slides. Rest
assured I will put them up - either as PDFs or better still, as a
podcast - over the next 2 weeks.

Coming up, I will be in Krakow speaking at their JUG on Thursday the
23rd, and then in Dublin on Tuesday the 29th. Details of these two
events are on the http://www.jboss.org/infinispan/talks[Infinispan Talks
Calendar]. Hope to see you there!

Cheers
Manik
