---
layout: blog
title: 'Infinispan: the Start of a New Era in Open Source Data Grids'
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/infinispan-start-of-new-era-in-open
date: '2009-04-28T14:00:00.000-07:00'
author: msurtani
tags: [ "data grids", "announcement" ]
thumbnail: http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_ca0W9t-Ryos/Sfhee24rNUI/AAAAAAAAAJg/hRj8RbeGgAE/s72-c/1159192_woman.jpg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-1032424688975648985
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2009/04/infinispan-start-of-new-era-in-open.html
---
Over the past few months we've been flying under the radar preparing for
the launch of a new, open source, highly scalable distributed data grid
platform. We've finally got to a stage where we can announce it publicly
and I would like to say that http://www.jboss.org/infinispan[Infinispan]
is now ready to take on the world!

The way we write computer software is changing. The demise of the
http://java.dzone.com/articles/caching-parallelism-scalability[Quake
Rule] has made hardware manufacturers cram more cores on a CPU, more
CPUs in a server. To achieve the levels of throughput and resilience
that modern applications demand, compute grids are becoming increasingly
popular. All this serves to exacerbate existing database bottlenecks;
hence the need for a data grid platform.

http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_ca0W9t-Ryos/Sfhee24rNUI/AAAAAAAAAJg/hRj8RbeGgAE/s1600-h/1159192_woman.jpg[image:http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_ca0W9t-Ryos/Sfhee24rNUI/AAAAAAAAAJg/hRj8RbeGgAE/s400/1159192_woman.jpg[image]]So
why is Infinispan sexy?

1. Massive heap - If you have 100 blade servers, and each node has 2GB
of space to dedicate to a replicated cache, you end up with 2 GB of
total data. Every server is just a copy. On the other hand, with a
distributed grid - assuming you want 1 copy per data item - you get a
100 GB memory backed virtual heap that is efficiently accessible from
anywhere in the grid. Session affinity is not required, so you don't
need fancy load balancing policies. Of course you can still use them for
further optimisation. If a server fails, the grid simply creates new
copies of the lost data, and puts them on other servers. This means that
applications looking for ultimate performance are no longer forced to
delegate the majority of their data lookups to a large single database
server - that massive bottleneck that exists in over 80% of enterprise
applications!

2. Extreme scalability - Since data is evenly distributed, there is
essentially no major limit to the size of the grid, except group
communication on the network - which is minimised to just discovery of
new nodes. All data access patterns use peer-to-peer communication where
nodes directly speak to each other, which scales very well.

3. Very fast and lightweight core - The internal data structures of
Infinispan are simple, very lightweight and heavily optimised for high
concurrency. Early benchmarks have indicated 3-5 times less memory
usage, and around 50% better CPU performance than the latest and
greatest JBoss Cache release. Unlike other popular, competing commercial
software, Infinispan scales when there are many local threads accessing
the grid at the same time. Even though non-clustered caching (LOCAL
mode) is not its primary goal, Infinispan still is very competitive
here.

4. Not Just for Java (PHP, Python, Ruby, C, etc.) - The
http://www.jboss.org/community/wiki/InfinispanRoadmap[roadmap] has a
plan for a language-independent server module. This will support both
the popular memcached protocol - with existing clients for almost every
popular programming language - as well as an optimised
Infinispan-specific protocol. This means that Infinispan is not just
useful to Java. Any major website or application that wants to take
advantage of a fast data grid will be able to do so.

5. Support for Compute Grids - Also on the roadmap is the ability to
pass a Runnable around the grid. You will be able to push complex
processing towards the server where data is local, and pull back results
using a Future. This
http://labs.google.com/papers/mapreduce.html[map/reduce] style paradigm
is common in applications where a large amount of data is needed to
compute relatively small results.

6. Management is key! - When you start thinking about running a grid on
several hundred servers, management is no longer an extra, it becomes a
necessity. This is on Infinispan's roadmap. We aim to provide rich
tooling in this area, with many integration opportunities.

7. Competition is Proprietary - All of the major, viable competitors in
the space are not open-source, and are very expensive. Enough said.
:-)

What are data
grids?http://www.arcatoglobal.com/images/ag_serverfarm.jpg[image:http://www.arcatoglobal.com/images/ag_serverfarm.jpg[image]]

Data grids are, to put it simply, highly concurrent distributed data
structures. Data grids typically allow you to address a large amount of
memory and store data in a way that it is quick to access. They also
tend to feature low latency retrieval, and maintain adequate copies
across a network to provide resilience to server failure.

As such, at its core, Infinispan presents a humble data structure. But
this is also a high specialised data structure, tuned to and geared for
a great degree of concurrency - especially on multi-CPU/multi-core
architectures. Most of the internals are essentially lock- and
synchronization-free, favouring state-of-the-art non-blocking algorithms
and techniques wherever possible. This translates to a data structure
that is extremely quick even when it deals with a large number of
concurrent accesses.

Beyond this, Infinispan is also a distributed data structure. It farms
data out across a cluster of in-memory containers. It does so with a
configurable degree of redundancy and various parameters to tune the
performance-versus-resilience trade-off. Local "L1" caches are also
maintained for quick reads of frequently accessed data.

Further, Infinispan supports
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Transaction_API[JTA] transactions. It
also offers eviction strategies to ensure individual nodes do not run
out of memory and passivation/overflow to disk. Warm-starts using
preloads are also supported.

JBoss Cache and Infinispan

So where does Infinispan stand against the competition? Let's start with
http://www.jbosscache.org/[JBoss Cache]. It is no surprise that there
are many similarities between JBoss Cache and Infinispan, given that
they share the same minds! Infinispan is an evolution of JBoss Cache in
that it borrows ideas, designs and some code, but for all practical
purposes it is a brand new project and a new, much more streamlined
codebase.

JBoss Cache has evolved from a basic replicated tree structure to
include custom, high performance marshalling (in version 1.4), Buddy
Replication (1.4), a new simplified API (2.X), high concurrency MVCC
locking (3.0.X) and a new non-blocking state transfer mechanism (3.1.X).
These were all incremental steps, but it is time for a quantum leap.

Hence Infinispan. Infinispan is a whole new project - not just JBoss
Cache 4.0! - because it is far wider in scope and goals - not to mention
target audience. Here are a few points summarising the differences:

* JBoss Cache is a clustering library. Infinispan's goal is to be a data
grid platform, complete with management and migration tooling.
* JBoss Cache's focus has been on clustering, using replication. This
has allowed it to scale to several 10s (occasionally even over 100)
nodes. Infinispan's goals are far greater - to scale to grids of several
100's of nodes, eventually exceeding 1000's of nodes. This is achieved
using consistent hash based data distribution.
* Infinispan's data structure design is significantly different to that
of JBoss Cache. This is to help achieve the target CPU and memory
performance. Internally, data is stored in a flat, map-like container
rather than a tree. That said, a tree-like compatibility layer -
implemented on top of the flat container - is provided to aid migration
from JBoss Cache.
* JBoss Cache traditionally competed against other frameworks like
EHCache and Terracotta. Infinispan, on the other hand, goes head to head
against Oracle's Coherence, Gemfire and Gigaspaces.

I have put up some
http://www.jboss.org/community/wiki/InfinispanFrequentlyAskedQuestions[FAQs
on the project]. A
http://www.jboss.org/community/wiki/InfinispanRoadmap[project roadmap]
is also available, as well as
http://www.jboss.org/community/wiki/5minutetutorialonInfinispan[a
5-minute guide to using Infinispan].

Have a look at
https://jira.jboss.org/jira/browse/ISPN?report=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.project:roadmap-panel[JIRA]
or grab the code from our
http://www.jboss.org/infinispan/sourcecode[Subversion repository] to see
where we are with things. If you are interested in participating in
Infinispan, be sure to read our
http://www.jboss.org/infinispan/community[community page].

I look forward to your feedback!

Cheers
Manik
