---
layout: blog
title: Implementing a performant, thread-safe ordered data container
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/implementing-performant-thread-safe
date: '2009-05-12T08:00:00.000-07:00'
author: msurtani
tags: [ "algorithms", "eviction", "concurrency", "data structures" ]
thumbnail: http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_ca0W9t-Ryos/SgGwA2iw_vI/AAAAAAAAAKA/TpVMWo2Rq9U/s72-c/FIFODataContainer.jpeg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-8504267898869156624
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2009/05/implementing-performant-thread-safe.html
---
To achieve efficient ordering of entries in the
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/DataContainer.html[DataContainer]
interface for configurations that support eviction, there was a need for
a linked HashMap implementation that was thread-safe and performant.
Below, I specifically discuss the implementations of the
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/FIFODataContainer.html[FIFODataContainer]
and
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/LRUDataContainer.html[LRUDataContainer]
in Infinispan 4.0.x. Wherever this document references
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/FIFODataContainer.html[FIFODataContainer],
this also applies to
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/LRUDataContainer.html[LRUDataContainer]
- which extends
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/FIFODataContainer.html[FIFODataContainer].
The only difference is that
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/LRUDataContainer.html[LRUDataContainer]
updates links whenever an entry is visited as well as added.

After analysing and considering a few different approaches, the one I
settled on is a subset of the algorithms described by H. Sundell and P.
Tsigas in their 2008 paper titled
http://www.md.chalmers.se/%7Etsigas/papers/Lock-Free-Deques-Doubly-Lists-JPDC.pdf[Lock-Free
Deques and Doubly Linked Lists], combined with the approach used by
Sun's JDK6 for reference marking in
http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ConcurrentSkipListMap.html[ConcurrentSkipListMap]'s
implementation.

Reference marking? What's that?

Compare-and-swap (CAS) is a common technique today for atomically
updating a variable or a reference without the use of a mutual exclusion
mechanism like a lock. But this only works when you modify a single
memory location at a time, be it a reference or a primitive. Sometimes
you need to atomically update two separate bits of information in a
single go, such as a reference, as well as some information about that
reference. Hence reference marking. In C, this is sometimes done by
making use of the assumption that an entire word in memory is not needed
to store a pointer to another memory location, and some bits of this
word can be used to store additional flags via bitmasking. This allows
for atomic updates of both the reference and this extra information
using a single CAS operation.

This is possible in Java too using
http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/atomic/AtomicMarkableReference.html[AtomicMarkableReference],
but is usually considered overly complex, slow and space-inefficient.
Instead, what we do is borrow a technique from
http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ConcurrentSkipListMap.html[ConcurrentSkipListMap]
and use an intermediate, delegating entry. While this adds a little more
complexity in traversal (you need to be aware of the presence of these
marker entries when traversing the linked list), this performs better
than an
http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/atomic/AtomicMarkableReference.html[AtomicMarkableReference].

In this specific implementation, the 'extra information' stored in a
reference is the fact that the entry holding the reference is in the
process of being deleted. It is a common problem with lock-free linked
lists when you have concurrent insert and delete operations that the
newly inserted entry gets deleted as well, since it attaches itself to
the entry being concurrently deleted. When the entry to be removed marks
its references, however, this makes other threads aware of the fact and
cause CAS operations on the reference to fail and retry.

Performance

Aside from maintaining order of entries and being thread-safe,
performance was one of the other goals. The target is to achieve
constant-time performance - O(1) - for all operations on
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/DataContainer.html[DataContainer].


The
clhttp://3.bp.blogspot.com/_ca0W9t-Ryos/SgGwA2iw_vI/AAAAAAAAAKA/TpVMWo2Rq9U/s1600-h/FIFODataContainer.jpeg[image:http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_ca0W9t-Ryos/SgGwA2iw_vI/AAAAAAAAAKA/TpVMWo2Rq9U/s400/FIFODataContainer.jpeg[image]]ass
diagram (click to view in full-size) depicts the
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/FIFODataContainer.html[FIFODataContainer]
class. At its heart the
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/FIFODataContainer.html[FIFODataContainer]
mimics a JDK
http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ConcurrentHashMap.html[ConcurrentHashMap]
(CHM), making use of hashtable-like lockable segments. Unlike the
segments in CHM, however, these segments are simpler as they support a
much smaller set of operations.

Retrieving data from the container
The use of segments allow for constant-time thread-safe get() and
containsKey() operations. Iterators obtained from the
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/DataContainer.html[DataContainer]
- which implements Iterable, and hence usable in for-each loops - and
keySet() are immutable, thread-safe and efficient, using traversal of
the linked list - making use of getNext() and getPrev() helpers. See
below for details. Traversal is efficient and constant-time.

Updating the container
When removing an entry, remove() locks the segment in question, removes
the entry, and unlinks the entry. Both operations are thread-safe and
constant-time. Locking the segment and removing the entry is pretty
straightforward. Unlinking involves marking references, and then an
attempt at CAS'ing next and previous references to bypass the removed
entry. Order here is important - updates to the next reference needs to
happen first, read on for more details as to why.

When performing a put(), the entry is created, segment locked and entry
inserted into the segment. The entry is then inserted at the tail of the
linked list. Again, both operations are thread-safe and constant-time.
Linking at the tail involves careful CAS'ing of references on the new
entry, the tail dummy entry and the former last entry in the list.

Maintaining a lock-free, concurrent doubly linked list
It is important to note that the entries in this implementation are
doubly linked. This is critical since, unlike the JDK's
http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ConcurrentSkipListMap.html[ConcurrentSkipListMap],
we use a hashtable to look up entries to be removed, to achieve constant
time performance in lookup. Locating the parent entry to update a
reference needs to be constant-time as well, and hence the need for a
previous reference. Doubly-linked lists make things much trickier
though, as there two references to update atomically (yes, that sounds
wrong!)

Crucially, what we do not care about - and do not support - is
reverse-order traversal. This means that we only really care about
maintaining accuracy in the forward direction of the linked list, and
treat the previous reference as an approximation to an entry somewhere
behind the current entry. Previous references can then be corrected -
using the correctPrev() helper method described below - to locate the
precise entry behind the current entry. By placing greater importance on
the forward direction of the list, this allows us to reliably CAS the
forward reference even if the previous reference CAS fails. It is hence
critical that whenever any references are updated, the next reference is
CAS'd first, and only on this success the previous reference CAS is
attempted. The same order applies with marking references. Also, it is
important that any process that touches an entry that observes that the
next pointer is marked but the previous pointer is not, attempts to mark
the previous pointer before attempting any further steps.

The specific functions we need to expose, to support
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/DataContainer.html[DataContainer]
operations, are:


[source,java]
----

void linkAtEnd(LinkedEntry entry);

void unlink(LinkedEntry entry);

LinkedEntry correctPrev(LinkedEntry suggestedPrev, LinkedEntry current);

LinkedEntry getNext(LinkedEntry current);

LinkedEntry getPrev(LinkedEntry current);
----


These are exposed as protected final methods, usable by
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/4.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/container/FIFODataContainer.html[FIFODataContainer]
and its subclasses. The implementations themselves use a combination of
CAS's on a LinkedEntry's next and previous pointers, marking references,
and helper correction of previous pointers when using getNext() and
getPrevious() to traverse the list. Note that it is important that only
the last two methods are used when traversing rather than directly
accessing a LinkedEntry's references - since markers need to be stepped
over and links corrected.

Please refer to
http://www.md.chalmers.se/%7Etsigas/papers/Lock-Free-Deques-Doubly-Lists-JPDC.pdf[Lock-Free
Deques and Doubly Linked Lists] for details of the algorithm steps.
