---
layout: blog
title: Infinispan 5.0.0.FINAL has hit the streets!
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/infinispan-500final-has-hit-streets
date: '2011-08-05T13:00:00.000-07:00'
author: Manik Surtani
tags: [ "final", "release" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-7886904018457220190
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2011/08/infinispan-500final-has-hit-streets.html
---
So here we have it - Infinispan 5.0 Pagoa has been released.  This is a
big, big release over 4.2.x, with over 45 new features (including the
much more robust https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-1000[PUSH-based
rehashing], https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-272[XA recovery],
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-186[smart L1 invalidation] and
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-870[virtual nodes]) and over 30
bugs squashed, including several critical performance and stability
related ones.  Major new programming models are supported too - from
https://docs.jboss.org/author/x/AIF7[Spring] and
https://docs.jboss.org/author/x/HYF7[CDI] through to OSGi,
https://docs.jboss.org/author/x/CYF7[map/reduce and distributed code
execution].



Pagoa has gone through over six months of development, the first alpha
being made publicly available in December 2010, and 8 whole release
candidates since the end of April this year.  This is the most stable,
fastest, feature-rich version of Infinispan to date.  Pagoa has been
integrated in other products, projects, frameworks and services -
including the lightning-fast http://www.jboss.org/as7[JBoss AS 7] - and
we expect to see much, much more in this regard.



Pagoa really is a community-centric release.  I've seen loads of
participation, from users, system integrators, extension-authors,
http://www.cloudtm.eu/[researchers and academics], framework authors,
and PaaS providers.  This participation has taken the form of providing
feedback and bug reports through to profiler analysis; from helping with
documentation and demos through to contributing major new features; from
suggesting ideas and improvements to participating in detailed design
meetings.  It is this participation that really helps Infinispan grow
and mature, and at the same time innovate, taking us one step closer to
becoming the best damn data grid out there.



So, a big thank you to everyone who participated, this really is
_your_ release.



As usual, http://www.jboss.org/infinispan/downloads[download] the
release,
http://community.jboss.org/en/infinispan?view=discussions[provide
feedback], read through the
https://issues.jboss.org/secure/ConfigureReport.jspa?atl_token=AQZJ-FV3A-N91S-UDEU%7C830c959e6f913e242bc3c9df8565631d3af3b0e0%7Clin&versions=12313468&sections=all&style=none&selectedProjectId=12310799&reportKey=org.jboss.labs.jira.plugin.release-notes-report-plugin%3Areleasenotes&Next=Next[detailed
changelog].  And check out our brand-new
https://docs.jboss.org/author/x/iYB7[documentation site] too!!  :-)



Finally, in other news,
http://infinispan.blogspot.com/2011/07/infinispan-51-has-codename.html[I
recently blogged about Brahma], the codename for Infinispan 5.1. Yes,
work has already started here, expect Brahma to be a real firecracker.
 Check out the post, vote for your most desired features.  Brahma will
also form the basis of Red Hat's Enterprise Data Grid product, which was
http://infinispan.blogspot.com/2011/05/red-hat-announces-enterprise-data-grid.html[announced
in May].  You'll finally have a fully supported open source data grid!



Enjoy!

Manik


