---
layout: blog
title: 'Keynote of the decade: behind the scenes, an Infinispan perspective'
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/keynote-of-decade-behind-scenes
date: '2011-06-09T01:16:00.000-07:00'
author: Manik Surtani
tags: [ "jbossworld",
"demo",
]
thumbnail: http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-BU_Th8gwcGQ/Te_F39JVgLI/AAAAAAAABfg/lFNL0VBpmIw/s72-c/Screen+shot+2011-06-08+at+19.55.50.png
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-7468026689122770664
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2011/06/keynote-of-decade-behind-scenes.html
---
http://www.redhat.com/summit/[JBoss World 2011]'s much talked about
keynote ended with a big bang - a live demo that many thought we were
insane to even try and pull off - and has sparked off a lot of interest,
many claiming JBoss _has got its mojo back_.  One of the things people
keep asking is, what actually went on?  How did we build such a demo?
 How can we do the same?



http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-BU_Th8gwcGQ/Te_F39JVgLI/AAAAAAAABfg/lFNL0VBpmIw/s1600/Screen+shot+2011-06-08+at+19.55.50.png[image:http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-BU_Th8gwcGQ/Te_F39JVgLI/AAAAAAAABfg/lFNL0VBpmIw/s320/Screen+shot+2011-06-08+at+19.55.50.png[image,width=320,height=240]]Firstly,
if you did not attend the keynote or did not watch it online, I
recommend that you *stop reading this now, and go and watch the
keynote.* http://www.jboss.org/jbw2011keynote[A recording is available
online] (the demo starts at about minute 35).



Ok, now that you've been primed, lets talk about the role Infinispan
played in that demo.  The demo involved reading mass volumes of
real-time data off a Twitter stream, and storing these tweets in an
Infinispan grid. This _primary grid_ (known as Grid-A), and ran off 3
large rack-mount servers. The Infinispan nodes were standalone,
bootstrapped off a simple Main class, and formed a cluster, running in
asynchronous
http://community.jboss.org/docs/DOC-14853#distribution[distributed mode]
with 2 data owners.



Andrew Sacamano did an excellent job of building an HTML 5-based webapp
to visualise what goes on in such a grid, making use of
http://community.jboss.org/docs/DOC-14871[cache listeners] pushing
events to browsers and browsers rendering the "spinning spheres" using
HTML 5's canvas tag.  So now we could visualise data and data movement
within a grid of Infinispan nodes.



http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-72Xfg5uM8Bk/Te_GgGQ4pQI/AAAAAAAABfk/ZphDf8ES4R8/s1600/Screen+shot+2011-06-08+at+19.58.06.png[image:http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-72Xfg5uM8Bk/Te_GgGQ4pQI/AAAAAAAABfk/ZphDf8ES4R8/s320/Screen+shot+2011-06-08+at+19.58.06.png[image,width=320,height=214]]As
Twitter data started to populate the grid, we fired up a second grid
(Grid-B) consisting of 8 nodes. Again, these nodes were configured using
asynchronous distribution and 2 data owners, but this time these nodes
were running on very small and cheap plugtop computers.  These plugtops
-
http://www.globalscaletechnologies.com/t-guruplugdetails.aspx[GuruPlugs]
- are constrained devices with 512MB of RAM, a 1GHz ARM processor.

Yes, your iPhone has more grunt :-) And yes, these sub-iPhone devices
were running a real data grid!

The purpose of this was to demonstrate the extremely low footprint and
overhead Infinispan imposes on your hardware (we even had to run
http://today.java.net/pub/a/today/2009/05/21/zero-and-shark-openjdk-port.html[the
zero assembly port of OpenJDK], an interpreted-mode JVM, since the
processor only had a 16-bit bus!). We also had a server running JBossAS
running Andrew's cool visualisation webapp rendering the contents of
Grid-B, so people could "see" the data in both grids.



We then fired up http://www.jboss.org/drools[Drools] to have it mine the
contents of Grid-A and send it to Grid-B applying some rules to select
the interesting tweets, namely the ones having the hashtag *#JBW*. With
this in place, we then invited the audience to participate - by tweeting
with hashtag #JBW, as well as the hashtag of your favourite JBoss
project - e.g., #infinispan :-)  People were allowed to vote for more
than one project, and the most prolific tweeter was to win a prize.
 This started a frenzy of tweeting, and was reflected in the two grid
visualisations.



Not only Infinispan is very quick here: needless to say, Drools was
sending the tweets from Grid-A to Grid-B using
http://www.jboss.org/hornetq[HornetQ], the fastest JMS implementation on
the planet.



Jay Balunas of http://www.jboss.org/richfaces[Richfaces] built a
TwitterStream app with live updates of these tweets for various devices,
including iPhones, iPads, Android phones and tablets, and of course,
desktop web browsers, grabbing data off Grid-B.  Christian Sadilek and
Mike Brock from the http://www.jboss.org/errai[Errai] team also built a
tag-cloud application visualising popular tags as a tag cloud, again off
Grid-B, making use of Errai to push events to the browser.



After simulating Mark Proctor to try cheating the system with a script,
we could recover the correct votes: clear Grid-B, update the Drools
rules to have it discard the cheat tweets, and have a cleaned up stream
of tweets flow to Grid-B.



All applications, including Drools and the visualizations, where using a
JPA interface to store or load the tweets: it was powered by an early
preview of http://community.jboss.org/docs/DOC-16273[HibernateOGM],
which aims to abstract any NoSQL store as a JPA persistence store while
still providing some level of consistency. As HibernateOGM is not
feature complete, it was using http://search.hibernate.org/[Hibernate
Search] to provide query capabilities via a Lucene index, and using the
Infinispan integration of Hibernate Search to distribute the index on
Infinispan.



We then demonstrated failover, as we invited the winner to come up on
stage to choose and brutally un-plug one of the plugtops of his choice
from Grid-B - this plugtop became his prize. Important to note, the
webapps running off the grid did not risk to lose any data, Drools
pulling stuff off Grid-A onto Grid-B was still able to continue running,
the Lucene index could continually be updated and queried by the
remaining nodes.



From an Infinispan perspective, what did this demo make use of?

* Data distribution, numOwners = 2
* Async network communication via http://jgroups.org/[JGroups]
* JTA integration with http://www.jboss.org/jbosstm[JBossTS]
* http://community.jboss.org/docs/DOC-14871[Cache listeners] to notify
applications of changes in data and topology
* The http://community.jboss.org/docs/DOC-14332[Infinispan Lucene
Directory] distributing the Lucene index on the grid

So a fairly simple setup, using simple embeddable components, cheap
hardware, to build a fairly complex application with excellent failover
and scalability properties.



So we where depending on wi-fi connectivity, internet access, a live
tweet stream, technology previews and people's cooperation!



To make things more interesting, the day before the demo one of the
servers died; hardware failure: didn't survive the trip. A second
server, meant to serve the UI webapps, started reporting failures on all
network interfaces just before starting the demo: it could not figure
out hardware addresses of cluster peers, and we had no time to replace
him: its backup was already dead. Interesting enough we could tap in
some advanced parameters of the JGroups configuration to workaround this
issue.



http://in.relation.to/service/File/13429[image:http://in.relation.to/service/File/13429[image,width=200,height=194]]Nothing
was pre-recorded! Actually the backup plan was to have Mark Little
dancing a tip-tap; next year we will try to stretch our demo even more
so you might see that dance!

So here you can see the recording of the
event: http://www.jboss.org/jbw2011keynote or listen to the
http://bit.ly/lELbAy[behind the scenes podcast].



After the demo, we did hear of a large commercial application using
Infinispan and Drools in precisely this manner - except instead of
Twitter, the large data stream was flight seat pricing, changing
dynamically and constantly, and eventually rendered to web pages of
various travel sites - oh, and they weren't running on plugtops in case
you were thinking ;)  So, the example isn't completely artificial.



How do you use Infinispan?  We'd love for you to share stories with us.



Cheers

Manik and Sanne
