---
layout: blog
title: Map/Reduce improvements in Infinispan 5.2.0ALPHA2
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/mapreduce-improvements-in-infinispan
date: '2012-07-25T13:14:00.001-07:00'
author: vblagojevic
tags: [ "map reduce" ]
thumbnail: http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-XVebeVW0q_4/UBA4EjeD1jI/AAAAAAAADRc/-2fTJvRfYLE/s72-c/mapphase.png
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-5128143110787697988
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2012/07/mapreduce-improvements-in-infinispan.html
---
As our MapReduce implementation grew out of the proof of concept phase
(and especially after our users had already production tested it), we
needed to remove the most prominent impediment to an industrial grade
MapReduce solution that we strive for: distributing reduce phase
execution.

Reduce phase prior to the Infinispan 5.2 release was done on a single
Infinispan master task node. Therefore, the size of map reduce problems
we could support (data size wise) was effectively shrunk to a working
memory of a single Infinispan node. Starting with the Infinispan 5.2
release, we have removed this limitation, and reduce phase execution is
distributed across the cluster as well. Of course, users still have an
option to use MapReduceTask the old way, and we even recommend that
particular approach for smaller sized input tasks. We have achieved
distribution of reduce phase by relying on Infinispan's consistent
hashing and DeltaAware cache insertion. Here is how we distributed
reduce phase execution:


*Map phase*


MapReduceTask, as it currently does, will hash task input keys and group
them by execution node N they are hashed to*. After key node mapping,
MapReduceTask sends map function and input keys to each node N. Map
function is invoked using given keys and locally loaded corresponding
values.



[cols="^" ]
|=======================================================================
|http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-XVebeVW0q_4/UBA4EjeD1jI/AAAAAAAADRc/-2fTJvRfYLE/s1600/mapphase.png[image:http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-XVebeVW0q_4/UBA4EjeD1jI/AAAAAAAADRc/-2fTJvRfYLE/s1600/mapphase.png[image]]

|Map and Combine phase
|=======================================================================





Results are collected with an Infinispan supplied Collector, and combine
phase is initiated. A Combiner, if specified, takes KOut keys and
immediately invokes reduce phase on keys. The result of mapping phase
executed on each node is KOut/VOut map. There will be one resulting map
per execution node N per launched MapReduceTask.



*Intermediate KOut/VOut migration phase*
**

In order to proceed with reduce phase, all intermediate keys and values
need to be grouped by intermediate KOut keys. More specifically, as map
phases around the cluster can produce identical intermediate keys, all
those identical intermediate keys and their values need to be grouped
before reduce is executed on any particular intermediate key.


Therefore at the end of combine phase, instead of returning map with
intermediate keys and values to the master task node, we instead hash
each intermediate key KOut and migrate it with its VOut values to
Infinispan node where keys KOut are hashed to. We achieve this using a
temporary DIST cache and underlying consistent hashing mechanism. Using
DeltaAware cache insertion we effectively collect all VOut values under
each KOut for all executed map functions across the cluster.

[cols="^" ]
|=======================================================================
|http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-0lsGH927liI/UBA4OJaq99I/AAAAAAAADRk/A3XqDY25_48/s1600/intermediatephase.png[image:http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-0lsGH927liI/UBA4OJaq99I/AAAAAAAADRk/A3XqDY25_48/s1600/intermediatephase.png[image]]

|Intermediate KOut/VOut grouping phase
|=======================================================================



At this point, map and combine phase have finished its execution; list
of KOut keys is returned to a master node and its initiating
MapReduceTask. We do not return VOut values as we do not need them at
master task node. MapReduceTask is ready to start with reduce phase.


*Reduce phase*


Reduce phase is easy to accomplish now as Infinispan's consistent
hashing already finished all the hard lifting for us. To complete reduce
phase, MapReduceTask groups KOut keys by execution node N they are
hashed to. For each node N and its grouped input KOut keys,
MapReduceTask sends a reduce command to a node N where KOut keys are
hashed. Once reduce command arrives on target execution node, it looks
up temporary cache belonging to MapReduce task - and for each KOut key,
grabs a list of VOut values, wraps it with an Iterator and invokes
reduce on it.



[cols="^" ]
|=======================================================================
|http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-lHTZdPcBuqU/UBA4Ym5nj4I/AAAAAAAADRs/lreaxwmR_7g/s1600/reducephase.png[image:http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-lHTZdPcBuqU/UBA4Ym5nj4I/AAAAAAAADRs/lreaxwmR_7g/s1600/reducephase.png[image]]

|Reduce phase
|=======================================================================



A result of each reduce is a map where each key is KOut and value is
VOut. Each Infinispan execution node N returns one map with KOut/VOut
result values. As all initiated reduce commands return to a calling
node, MapReduceTask simply combines all resulting maps into map M and
returns M as a result of MapReduceTask.


Distributed reduce phase is turned on by using a MapReduceTask
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/5.2/apidocs/org/infinispan/distexec/mapreduce/MapReduceTask.html#MapReduceTask(org.infinispan.Cache,%20boolean)[constructor] specifying
cache to use as input data for the task and boolean parameter
distributeReducePhase set to true. Map/Reduce API
http://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/5.2/apidocs/org/infinispan/distexec/mapreduce/package-summary.html[javadoc] and
demos are included in distribution.


*Moving forward*
*
*
For Infinispan 5.2.0 final release we want to make sure the execution of
intermediate migration key/value phase is as effective as possible and
proven to be lock free for large input tasks as it was in our functional
tests. We are also, as always, looking forward to your feedback and
suggestions - especially if you have large data input sets ready for our
latest MapReduceTask.


Cheers,
Vladimir
  


*If no keys are specified, entire cache key set will be used as in
input.

