---
layout: blog
title: Fine-grained replication in Infinispan
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/fine-grained-replication-in-infinispan
date: '2012-06-21T07:21:00.001-07:00'
author: Martin Genčúr
tags: [ "replication",
"fine grained",
"state transfer",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-5017518189290873036
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2012/06/fine-grained-replication-in-infinispan.html
---
== [.underline]##


Sometimes we have a large object, possibly with lots of attributes or
holding some binary data, and we would like to tell Infinispan to
replicate only certain part of the object across the cluster. Typically,
we wanna replicate only that part which we've just updated. This is
where DeltaAware and Delta interfaces come to play. By providing
implementations of these interfaces we can define fine-grained
replication. When we put some effort into such such an enhancements, we
would also like to speed up object marshalling and unmarshalling.
Therefore, we're going to define our own externalizers - to avoid slow
default Java serialization.

The following code snippets are gathered in a complete example at
https://github.com/mgencur/infinispan-examples/tree/master/partial-state-transfer
This project contains a readme file with instructions on how to build
and run the example. It is based on clustered-cache quickstart in
Infinispan.


=== Implementing DeltaAware interface


So let's look at our main object. For the purpose of this exercise, I
defined a Bicycle class that consists of many components like frame,
fork, rearShock, etc. This object is stored in a cache as a value under
certain (not important) key. It might happen in our scenario that we
update only certain components of the bike and in such case we want to
replicate just those component changes.

Important methods here are (description taken from javadocs):

commit() - Indicates that all deltas collected to date has been
extracted (via a
                 call to delta()) and can be discarded. Often used as an
optimization if
                 the delta isn't really needed, but the cleaning and
resetting of       
                 internal state is desirable.

delta() - Extracts changes made to implementations, in an efficient
format that
             can easily and cheaply be serialized and deserialized. 
This method will
             only be called once for each changeset as it is assumed
that any
             implementation's internal changelog is wiped and reset
after generating
             and submitting the delta to the caller.
         
We also need to define setters and getters for our members. Setter
methods are, among other things, responsible for registering changes to
the changelog that will be later used to reconstruct the object's state.
The externalizer for this class is only needed when cache stores are
used. For the sake of simplicity, I don't mention it here.





=== Implementing Delta interface


Actual object that will be replicated across the cluster is the
implementation of Delta interface. Let's look at the class. First, we
need a field that will hold the changes - changeLog. Second, we need to
define a merge() method. This method must be implemented so that
Infinispan knows how to merge an existing object with incoming changes.
The parameter of this method represents an object that is already stored
in a cache, incoming changes will be applied to this object. We're using
a reflection here to apply the changes to the actual object but it is
not necessary. We could easily call setter methods. The advantage of
using reflection is that we can set those fields in a loop.

Another piece is a registerComponentChange() method. This is called by
an object of the Bicycle class - to record changes to that object. The
name of this method is not important.


=== Defining our own externalizer 


Alright, so what remains is the externalizer definition for the Delta
implementation. We implement AdvancedExternalizer interface and say that
only changeLog object should be marshalled and unmarshalled when
transfering data over the wire. A complete (almost) implementation of
Delta interface is the following.




=== Tell Infinispan about the extra externalizer


We also need to configure Infinispan to use our special externalizer to
marshall/unmarshall our objects. We can do it e.g. programatically by
calling .addAdvancedExternalizer() on the serialization configuration
builder.


You can see we're also configuring transactions here. This is not
necessary, though. We just aim to provide a richer example, removing
transactional behavior is trully easy.

And here comes the "usage" part. Enclose cache calls by a transaction,
retrieve a bicycle object from the cache, do some changes and commit
them.


That's it. What is eventually transferred over the wire is just the
changeLog object. The actual bicycle object is reconstructed from
incomming updates.

If all of this seem to be too complex to you, I have good news.
Infinispan provides one implementation of DeltaAware interface whish is
called AtomicHashMap (package org.infinispan.atomic). If this map is
used as a value in key/value pairs stored in the cache, only
puts/gets/removes performed to this map during a transaction are
replicated to other nodes. Classes like Bicycle and BicycleDelta are not
need then. Even registering the externalizer for AtomicHashMap is not
needed, this is done automatically during registration of internal
externalizers. However, one might want a class emulating a real-world
object, not just a map. That's the case when your own implementations of
DeltaAware and Delta interfaces are the only way.
