---
layout: blog
title: Back from JUDCon China 2012
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/back-from-judcon-china-2012
date: '2012-12-10T02:58:00.000-08:00'
author: Galder Zamarreño
tags: [ "conference",
"event",
"judcon",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-582238491439856626
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2012/12/back-from-judcon-china-2012.html
---

http://www.jboss.org/events/JUDCon/2012/china[JUDCon China] was held for
the first time last week in Beijing, and it was a blast!

I had never been to China before, let alone a conference there, so it
was interesting to compare it with other conferences around the world.
The use of simulaneous translators meant those giving presentations in
English had to pace themselves a bit more so that translators would have
time to catch up. There's was a good bunch of presentation given by
native Chinese speakers too, so the audience got the chance to attend
more interactive sessions too.

During this two-day developer conference, I was showing
http://www.jboss.org/events/JUDCon/2012/china/agenda/day1track1.html[Infinispan's
capabilities as a powerful cache bulding a transactional EE application
that neeeded to scale up live]. In this presentation, which combines
Infinispan with JSF and CDI, I showed how to go from a basic temporary
cached, to a clustered cache that used consistent hashing to distribute
data, showing the ability to scale up and failover. This presentation
which was given shortly after the keynote on the first day generated a
lot of interest in the audience, with a lot of users wanting to find out
how we compared with other existing cache and data grid providers. This
was a great opportunitiy to introduce the rest of Inifnispan talks that
were happening that day and the day after, where they could learn more
Infinsipan's other features as a data grid: i.e. querying, geographic
failover...etc.

My second presentation that same day was about
http://www.jboss.org/events/JUDCon/2012/china/agenda/day1track1.html[querying
Infinispan based data grids]. The room was packed for this one, and in
the presentation I talked about how Infinispan's map/reduce functions
can take advantage of the paralellism available in cluster to resolve
basic queries, and how Infinispan's contents can be indexed using the
query module and queried via Hibernate Search or Apache Lucene APIs.
Finally, I did a little overview of higher level APIs offering further
querying possibilities (i.e. ModeShape, Hibernate OGM). As pointed out
by Ales, the lead of CapeDwarf team, I somehow forgot to add his
project, which offers the possibility of running Google App Engine on
top of JBoss Application Server, which uses Infinispan and offers
different querying possibilities too. Don't worry Ales, we'll sort it
out for this presentation's next outing :)

For those who attended, the presentations should be uploaded to the
http://www.jboss.org/events/JUDCon/2012/china[JUDCon China website]
within the next few weeks.

Not all was presentations though, we also had the chance to socialise
with attendees and other Red Hat employees in China. After all talks
finished the first day, Jim Ma and Yong Yang did a fantastics
https://github.com/yongyang/clusterdemo[demo of a cluster of JBoss
Application Server 7 instances running on Rasperry PIs], and the
audience had the opportunity to win one a Rasperry Pi too!

If you're thinking of going to China, you can't leave without trying a
hot pot place! On Friday night we went to a
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hai_Di_Lao_hot_pot[Hai Dai Lao Hot Pot
restaurant] for food, and from a culinary perspective, it was the best
food I had during my China stay. Hot Pot restaurants have this concept
of cooking different meats, vegetables and noodles in two hot pots, one
spicy and the other not. On top of that, you get the chance to mix up
some cold sauces yourself (sesame oil, coriander, nuts, chillies,,etc)
and mix that with the cooked meat/veg. Unfortunately, one of our
colleagues who had a nut allergy had to be rushed to hospital, but it
was all Ok in the end :).

From here I'd like to thank Cindy Dong, Jervis Liu, Jim Ma, Christina
Lin and many others that helped us, Aliens (according to Chinese
Immigration prospects), feel like at home :). Can't wait to get back to
China.

Cheers,
Galder
