---
layout: blog
title: Infinispan Arquillian Container 1.0.0.CR1 released
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/infinispan-arquillian-container-100cr1
date: '2012-09-05T05:27:00.001-07:00'
author: Martin Genčúr
tags: [ "testing",
"data grids",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-6353824341744809154
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2012/09/infinispan-arquillian-container-100cr1.html
---
Infinispan Arquillian Container is an extension to Arquillian that
provides several ways to interact with Infinispan, either with a
standalone Infinispan server or just with Infinispan libraries. This
extension can also communicate with JBoss Data Grid server via JMX.

It was released as Maven artifacts in JBoss Maven Repository. It is
located at
http://repository.jboss.org/nexus/content/groups/public-jboss/%20[http://repository.jboss.org/nexus/content/groups/public-jboss/]
. More information on how to set up and use the repo can be found at
https://community.jboss.org/wiki/MavenGettingStarted-Users

What does this Arquillian extension offer to you? Let me describe all
aspects of this extension one by one.


== Developing tests with standalone Infinispan server


When testing, you might want to automatically start the Infinispan
server before the test and stop it afterwards. This can be achieved by
configuring infinispan-arquillian-container via Arquillian's
configuration file. The following is a subset of attributes that can be
specified and thus passed to the Infinispan server during startup:
masterThreads, workerThreads, cacheConfig, jmxPort, ... The complete
list can be found in http://bit.ly/R7j4d1[bit.ly/R7j4d1] (all private
fields).


NOTE: Examples are not a part of the release, only libraries are. In
order to check out examples provided with the project, one has to clone
project's repository:
https://github.com/mgencur/infinispan-arquillian-container Examples are
located in the respective sub-directory.

The configuration file then looks similar to the following:


Whether these two Infinispan servers are clustered or not depends on the
configuration passed to them via cacheConfig (file path) attribute or
their default configuration (when no config. file is passed). The
configuration in arquillian.xml file just says: "Start these two
instances with whatever configuration is passed to them".

Complete example: http://bit.ly/RkrpEE[bit.ly/RkrpEE]

When we tell Arquillian to work with Infinispan server, we can inject
RemoteInfinispanServer object into our test. Such an object provides
various information about the running Infinispan server. For example, we
can retrieve a hostname and HotRod port and use these pieces of
information to create a RemoteCacheManager instance. Besides that users
are allowed to retrieve information available via JMX from the server
like cluster size, number of entries in the cache, number of cache hits
and many more.


Complete example: http://bit.ly/OaCw8q

Vital dependencies required for the test to run are:

org.infinispan.arquillian.container:infinispan-arquillian-container-managed:jar:1.0.0.CR1:test
org.infinispan.arquillian.container:infinispan-arquillian-impl:jar:1.0.0.CR1:test

Not only with standalone Infinispan server can Infinispan Arquillian
extension work.


== Developing tests with JBoss Data Grid (JDG) server


This time, the properties in Arquillian's configuration file are
different and correspond to properties of JBoss Application Server 7.
The most important property is again the path to the server
(jbossHome).


Are you interested in what the test looks like? It looks completely the
same as tests for standalone Infinispan server, you just have a few more
attributes available. JDG server usually starts all three endpoints
(HotRod, Memcached, REST) at the same time while for the Infinispan
server you have to specify which end point should be started.
Furthermore, Infinispan server does not have the REST endpoint available
out-of-the-box.

As a result, you can call the following methods with JDG in one single
test.

server1.getMemcachedEndpoint().getPort();
server1.getRESTEndpoint().getContextPath();
server1.getHotRodEndpoint().getPort();

The difference is, of course in dependencies. Instead of a handler for
standalone Infinispan server, one has to use a handler for JBoss AS 7.
The dependencies then look like this:

org.jboss.as:jboss-as-arquillian-container-managed:jar:7.1.2.Final:test
org.infinispan.arquillian.container:infinispan-arquillian-impl:jar:1.0.0.CR1:test



== Testing Infinispan libraries


Sometimes we don't want to use a standalone server. Sometimes we want to
test just Infinispan in its basic form - Java libraries. Infinispan has
been under development for years and during that time, lots of tests
were developed. With tests come utility methods. Infinispan Arquillian
Container enables you to leverage these utility methods and call them
via an instance of DatagridManager. This instance can be easily injected
into a test, no matter which test framework (TestNG, JUnit) you use.

DatagridManager class can be found at http://bit.ly/Q0a7ki

Can you see the advantage? No? Let me point out some useful methods
available in the manager.


List<Cache<K, V>> createClusteredCaches(int numMembersInCluster, String
cacheName, ConfigurationBuilder builder)


- creates a cluster of caches with certain name and pre-defined
configuration


void waitForClusterToForm()


- helps to wait until the cluster is up and running


Cache<A, B> cache(int index)


- retrieves a cache from certain node according to the index


Cache<A, B> cache(int managerIndex, String cacheName)


- retrieves a cache with that name


void killMember(int cacheIndex)


- kills a cache with cacheIndex index


AdvancedCache advancedCache(int i)


- retrieves an advanced cache from node i


Trancation tx(int i)


- retrieves a transaction from node i


TransactionManager tm(int i)


- retrieves a transaction manager from node i

...and much more.


The following test can be found among other examples in the GIT
repository.


Required dependencies:

org.infinispan:infinispan-core:jar:5.1.5.FINAL:test  -  users should
replace this version with the one they want to test
org.infinispan.arquillian.container:infinispan-arquillian-impl:jar:1.0.0.CR1:test

Infinispan Arquillian Container was tested with Infinispan 5.1.5.FINAL
and JDG 6.0.0.GA. Nevertheless, it should work smoothly also with other
not-very-distinct versions. I'll be updating the project to work with
newer versions of both Infinispan and JBoss Data Grid.
 

