---
layout: blog
title: Embedded Cluster Listeners in Infinispan 7.0.0.Alpha1
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/embedded-cluster-listeners-in
date: '2014-03-05T06:54:00.000-08:00'
author: Infinispan
tags: [ " listeners" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-5744590504523514675
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2014/03/embedded-cluster-listeners-in.html
---
If you are following on the dev listing, you may have seen a
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan/wiki/Clustered-listeners[design
doc] come through that details adding support for Clustered Listeners to
Infinispan.  This features allows for listeners to be used in a
distributed cache configuration.  I am happy to say that this feature is
now in
http://blog.infinispan.org/2014/02/infinispan-700alpha1-release.html[Infinispan
7.0.0.Alpha1] !

This feature is needed since local listeners in a distributed cache are
only notified of events on the node where the data resides.  Therefore,
clustered listeners allow for a single listener to receive any write
notification (limited to CacheEntryCreatedEvent, CacheEntryModifiedEvent
and CacheEntryRemovedEvent) that occurs in the cluster which is
installed on 1 node.


==== Basic Example

Using a cluster listener is just as easy as a regular listener. Here is
a simple use case that stores the events as it receives them.

That is all that is required is just to set the property of your
Listener annotated class to say _clustered = true_. There are other
important changes in the rest of the document. Please let us know how
you like the new cluster listeners ! Also if any issues are found, it is
much appreciated to log those to
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN[JIRA].


==== Differences between Local and Cluster Listeners

===== Pre and post Notifications

In a local cluster listener, the listener is notified twice, before the
operation is completed and after the entry is updated.  A cluster
listener is *ONLY* notified after the operation is completed while still
holding locks.  Therefore, the _isPre_ method always returns false in a
cluster listener.

===== Transaction begin and completion

In a transactional cache, local listeners are notified when a
transaction begins and when it is completed (either through rollback or
commit).  A cluster listener is never notified of anything occurring
until after the data has been updated, and thus will only ever be
notified of committed entries and also will not receive
TransactionRegisteredEvent or TransactionCompletedEvent events.


=== API Changes


There are a few new API classes that have been added to allow for
configuration and operation of cluster listeners.


==== Listener annotation


The existing org.infinispan.notifications.Listener annotation has had a
couple properties added to it.

The new clustered property defines whether or not this listener is a
cluster listener or not.  This means the listener will be sent all write
modification events.

A cluster listener is not supported in an Invalidation cache.  Local or
replicated caches can use a cluster listener though.  They will behave
like a local cluster listener, except that replicated will be less
performant.

The includeCurrentState property is also new and will provide a way for
a listener when being registered to immediately be sent a
CacheCreatedEvent for every entry in the cache.  This will be supported
for both local and cluster listeners.  In a local listener it will only
query the local data that is available, so in the case of a Distributed
cache this will still only provide a possible subset of data.  However a
clustered listener will retrieve the data from all nodes as needed.  A
cache will still be available for writes during the includeCurrentState
period.  However the notifications will be queued until all state has
been first sent. *NOTE: includeCurrentState is currently not implemented
but is planned during this release still* see
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-4068[ISPN-4068]


==== KeyValueFilter


This is a new Filter class that can be used to filter events or other
operations based on the key value and metadata of the updated object.



==== Converter


A converter is used to convert a given key, value, metadata entry to a
resulting value. This is useful if your listener doesn't require the
entire value and need just a portion from it. Or if the listener were to
do some sort of translation, this would allow it to scale to each node
instead of having to run the translation all on the node where the
listener is registered.



==== Cache


The cache interface also has an additional overloaded method to allow
for registering the previously mentioned KeyValueFilter and Converter
with the Listener provided.  Note that either type of listener, cluster
or local, may be used with any of the overloaded addListener methods on
the Cache interface.

This new method is similar to the other addListener methods, but is
specially optimized for use with cluster listeners in distributed mode.
Whenever a modification occurs which would cause an event to be sent to
the cluster notifier the KeyValueFilter is first ran to see if this
event should even be sent to the listener. If it is then the converter
will be used to convert result into whatever data is desired to send
back to the listener. These combined allow for reducing overall network
traffic for events that you don't want to get or reduce payload size by
sending a different or subset of the value.


==== Events


There are some cases in Infinispan when it is unclear if a notification
was properly raised in a non transactional cache. Due to this we have
made available an additional value on the CacheEntryCreatedEvent,
CacheEntryModifiedEvent, and CacheEntryRemovedEvent. This is to
symbolize that this event could have been possibly duplicated or even
changed types (CacheEntryModifiedEvent instead of
CacheEntryCreatedEvent).

This should only return true if we had a node who was an owner go down
while in the middle of processing the write.


=== Functional Changes



==== CacheEntryModified during creates


Prior to Infinispan 7.0, whenever a new entry was created, this would
generate both CacheEntryCreated and CacheEntryModified events.  This has
been changed now so that only a CacheEntryCreated event is raised to
more consistently model what has occurred.

