---
layout: blog
title: Why doesn't Map.size return the size of the entire cluster?
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/why-doesnt-mapsize-return-size-of
date: '2014-11-04T05:41:00.000-08:00'
author: infinispan
tags: []
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-7688496915197931482
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2014/11/why-doesnt-mapsize-return-size-of.html
---
Many people may have been surprised the first time they used Map.size
method on a distributed Infinispan cluster.  As was later deduced only
the local node size is returned.

Infinispan had taken this approach to limit the chance that instead of
getting the full cluster size you would receive an OutOfMemoryError. 
This seems fair to return the local answer only but you secretly always
wanted the entire cluster size.

For the
http://blog.infinispan.org/2014/11/infinispan-700final-is-out.html[Infinispan
7.0.0.Final release] forget what you know when using the Map interface
with Infinispan.

== 

== Enter Distributed Entry Iterator

We already announced this feature a while back at
http://blog.infinispan.org/2014/05/iterate-all-entries-in-cache.html. 
You can check it out for more details but it is essentially a memory
efficient way of retrieving all the entries in the cache by iterating
over them.

This has opened the way to implementing the various bulk methods on the
Map interface that we could never do efficiently in the past (ie.
Map.size, Map.keySet, Map.entrySet & Map.values).


== Map size

Okay I admit, size could have been done more efficiently before, but the
answer would have contained a very high margin of error.  Now size will
give you a size value with consistency semantics just slightly less than
ConcurrentHashMap does, but for the entire cluster.  Warning should be
given that size may be slower for larger clusters or ones with a lot of
data in a stored cache loader.

The size method behavior can be controlled by using a supplied
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/7.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/AdvancedCache.html#withFlags%28org.infinispan.context.Flag...%29[Flag]
such as SKIP_CACHE_LOAD to not count any configured cache loaders or
CACHE_MODE_LOCAL if you want the local count only.  These flags are not
exclusive and can be both passed if desired as well.


== 

== Map Collection Views

In the past the Map.values, Map.keySet & Map.entrySet methods were only
ever in memory copies of the local data at the time they were invoked,
similar to Map.size.

Now these collection views will be cluster wide and an additionally will
show updated contents when the cache is updated and your writes to the
collection will be reflected in the Cache itself!  The only operations
you can't do on these collections are adding values to either the keySet
or values collections as they aren't key/value pairs.

If your cache was configured with a Flag such as SKIP_CACHE_LOAD or
CACHE_MODE_LOCAL it will also be reflected in the collection view for
both reads and writes.

Some caution is advised when using toArray, retainAll, or size methods
as they will require full iteration to complete.

*KeySet Optimization*

The key set collection also has an optimization so it will never pull
down the values so it has a lower network and
serialization/deserialization overhead (unlike entrySet and values).


== Transactionality

All of the aforementioned methods still support transactions in a way
that you would expect.  There is one guarantee we don't provide and that
is when using REPEATABLE_READ isolation.  We will not store entries read
from an iterator in the transactional context as this could very easily
run your local node out of memory with a large enough data set.

For reference methods that use an iterator internally are toArray,
retainAll, isEmpty & size on the various collections as well as contains
and containsAll on the values collection.

== Other API Changes

These changes have also loosened some restrictions on other methods as
well.


=== Map.isEmpty

This method before was only used locally as it used to calculate the
size to determine if it was empty.  This method will now use the entry
iterator and returns as soon as it finds that even a single value
exists.  This is an important change as the old implementation would
have to query any configured Cache Loader's complete size before
returning.


=== Map.containsValue

We never supported this method before (not even locally).  This method
will now use the iterator though and if it finds the value at any point
point will return immediately so it doesn't have to iterate over the
entire contents unless they don't exist.  However if you really want to
do this operation often you should really use
http://infinispan.org/docs/7.0.x/user_guide/user_guide.html#sid-68355061[Indexing]
to make this faster.


== Code Examples

I could put an example here, but I think some could take it as insult. 
You have already seen 100's of examples as to how to use the Map
interface and now in Infinispan you can use those in the exact same way
and they will work just how you would expect them to.
