---
layout: blog
title: Iterate all the entries in the cache
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/iterate-all-entries-in-cache
date: '2014-05-27T13:17:00.001-07:00'
author: infinispan
tags: []
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-8467800185644192234
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2014/05/iterate-all-entries-in-cache.html
---
Dear all, with the release of
http://blog.infinispan.org/2014/05/infinispan-700alpha4-is-out.html[7.0.0.Alpha4]
it was mentioned that we now support Distributed Entry Iterator which
allows for iteration over all entries in the cache.  Iterating over all
the entries in the cache has always been an highly demanded community
feature. Existing methods (entrySet, keySet, size) were not a good fit
because of potential OOM and were causing a lot of user annoyance. Voila
a nice distributed solution :-) 
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-4222[ISPN-4222]


== Public Interface Additions


The added public API changes are as follows:

===
AdvancedCache


This returns an EntryIterable that can be used directly as an Iterable
over the contents or also to pass a converter to convert the resulting
value that is returned to another value or even type itself.

===
EntryIterable




EntryIterable also implements AutoCloseable and as such should be closed
after iteration or if an exception case occurs.  Thus the Java 7 try
with resources syntax should be used.

Note that EntryIterable has a method that allows you to also provide an
optional Converter to change the values to another type if desired. This
conversion is done on the remote nodes and is preferable to be used when
the values can be reduced in size to reduce overall payload size.

An example of how to perform the iteration with any cache type.



== General Algorithm


Essentially when the iterator is generated it will start an iteration
process on the local node to retrieve all values local to that node
(including from loader) and also a remote thread that will do the same
thing on nodes one at at time. As values are retrieved they are made
available to the iterator for processing. The chunkSize configuration
for the State Transfer configuration will limit how many values are
available to be waiting to be iterated on at a time (loader, local and
remotely retrieved values count towards this). This is important to
limit how many values are stored in memory when both using a loader and
in distributed caches to help prevent an OOM condition from occurring.

The provided KeyValueFilter is used on the various nodes to limit what
entries are returned to the iterator and are sent to the remote node(s)
when using a Distributed cache to limit how many results are returned. A
converter is similar to the KeyValueFilter but it is ran on any entry
that passes the filter to possibly converter the value to another such
as a projection view if desired. Both the KeyValueFilter and Converter
must be serializable for proper operation!

The operation is also aware of rehash events occurring, since this could
alter which node owns what entry. This is handled automatically by the
iterator by tracking what segments have moved and requesting them from
the other node if needed.


== Local, Replicated and Invalidation Cache Optimizations


These caches have some additional optimizations from above in the
following

. The KeyValueFilter and Converter do not need to be Serializable
. KeyValueFilter optimization is only relevant when using a loader
. Converter optimization is minimial, the main benefit being it allows
code to be the same between cache types

== Gotchas


This is just to talk about some various cases that users should be aware
of.

=== Transactional Behaviour

When using the entry iterator in a transactional context, all of the
values are retrieved outside of the current transaction if there is one,
and no transaction is started if there isn't one.

This is done due to the behaviour of Repeatable Read isolation level. 
If not then then all of the retrieved values would have to be stored
locally in the current context for that transaction, which would most
likely cause an OOM condition in many cases.

=== Removal using Iterator

Since the iteration process does not take part of transactions, the
remove operation of the iterator is not supported as well.  If desired
the user should just invoke the remove method from the Cache itself to
do this.

=== Consistency Guarantees

This iterator only guarantees consistency in regards to each value
independently. That is it will show a view of each value that existed
during the period of when the iteration began and when it completed.
Thus it is entirely possible to see a subset of values if say a
transaction was committed at the same time as iteration. This would
require additional isolation level changes outside of the scope of the
iterator to implement this, such as adding Serializable isolation
level.

=== Return type change

Before ISPN 7 is released, it is still needed to change the return type
from Map.Entry to instead be CacheEntry as users may need the Metadata
stored with the entry as well. This will come in
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-4326[ISPN-4326]


== Try it out


Let us know if and how you guys plan on using this and any feedback
would be appreciated!


== *Update* Oct 31, 2014

As of Infinispan 7.0.0.Final the Entry Iterator now properly supports
transactional data and thus will show the most up to date value if there
is a pending change (however read values are not brought into the
context to prevent OOM errors).

The remove operation on the iterator is fully supported and will perform
the operation in the current transactional context if there is one. 
Caution though as you must use the iterator in the thread it was
retrieved from for it to work properly.
