---
layout: blog
title: 'A Factory of Atomic Objects '
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/a-factory-of-atomic-objects
date: '2015-01-14T03:34:00.000-08:00'
author: infinispan
tags: []
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-7119280900298638951
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2015/01/a-factory-of-atomic-objects.html
---
Distributed systems aggregate large numbers of heterogeneous components
that are subject to failures and asynchrony. To tame such a capricious
nature, systems designers resort to non-blocking techniques such as
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_machine_replication[state machine
replication.] This approach provides consistent
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-blocking_algorithm[non-blocking]
operations to a shared object replicated at a quorum of machines. State
machine replication is a classical paradigm to consistently orchestrate
concurrency between remote processes in a distributed system, and as
such a weapon of choice to manage metadata operations. This approach is
at work in many services such as Apache
http://zookeeper.apache.org/[ZooKeeper], Google
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_lock_manager[Chubby],Â or
http://openreplica.org/[Open Replica].

The (experimental)
https://github.com/otrack/Leads-infinispan/tree/atomicObjectFactory/atomic-factory[atomic
object factory] module is an implementation of the state machine
replication paradigm over Infinispan. Using the factory is as simple as
employing the synchronized keyword in Java: it suffices to call it with
a Serializable class, and it wraps for you the dependability,
consistency and liveness guarantees of the instantiated object over
multiple Infinispan servers. The factory is universal in the sense that
it can instantiate an object of any (serializable) class atop an
Infinispan cache, making transparently the object replicated and
durable, while ensuring strong consistency despite concurrent access.

Basic Usage

Using the AtomicObjectFactory is fairly simple. We illustrate below a
base use case. Additional examples are provided in the maven test
directories.

AtomicObjectFactory factory = new AtomicObjectFactory(c1); // c1 is a
cache
Set set = (Set) factory.getInstanceOf(HashSet.class, "k"); // k is the
storage key
set.add("something"); // some call examples
System.out.println(set.toString())
set.addAll(set);
factory.disposeInstanceOf(HashSet.class, "set", true); // to
persistently store the object

Limitations & Guarantees

The implementation requires that all the arguments of the methods of the
object are Serializable, as well as the object itself. An object created
by the factory is atomic provided that the cache which supports it is
both synchronous and transactional.

Going Further

*White Paper.*
The factory is described in Section 4 of the paper titled "On the
Support of Versioning in Distributed Key-Value Stores" published at the
33rd IEEE Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS'14). A
preprint version of this paper is available at the following
https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BwFkGepvBDQoTEdPS0x6VXhqMW8/edit?usp=sharing[location].

*High-level Implementation Details.*
We built the factory on top of the transactional facility of Infinispan.
In more details, when the object is created, we store both a local copy
and a proxy registered as a cache listener. We serialize every call in a
transaction consisting of a single put operation. When the call is
de-serialized, it is applied to the local copy and, in case the calling
process was local, the response value is returned.
