---
layout: blog
title: Memory based eviction
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/memory-based-eviction
date: '2015-09-25T05:07:00.001-07:00'
author: Infinispan
tags: [
"eviction",
"memory",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-9205619912921210471
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2015/09/memory-based-eviction.html
---
== Eviction Today

Infinispan since its inception has supported a way to help users control
how much memory the in memory cache entries consume in the JVM.  This
has always been limited to a number of entries.  In the past users have
had to estimate the average amount of bytes their entries used on the
heap.  With this average you can easily calculate how many entries could
safely be stored in memory without running into issues.  For users who
have keys and values that are relatively similar this can work well. 
However when the case requires entries that vary in size this can be
problematic and you end up calculating the average size based on the
worse case.


== Enter Memory Based Eviction


Infinispan 8 introduces memory based eviction counting.  That is
Infinispan will automatically keep track of how large the key, value and
overhead if possible.  It can use these values then to try to limit the
number of entries instead to a memory count such as 1 Gigabyte.


=== Key/Value limitations

Unfortunately this is currently limited to only using keys and values
stored as primitives, primitive wrappers (ie. Integer),
java.lang.String(s) and any of the previously mentioned stored in an
array.  This means this feature cannot be used with any custom classes. 
If enough feedback is provided we could provide a SPI to allow the user
to plug in their own counter for their own classes, but this is not
planned currently.

There are a couple ways to easily get around this.  One is to use
http://infinispan.org/docs/8.0.x/user_guide/user_guide.html#_store_as_binary[storeAsBinary],
which will store your keys and/or values as byte arrays for you
automatically, satisfying this limitation.  A second way is when you are
using the client such as HotRod, in this case the data is stored in the
serialized (byte[]) form.  Note that
http://infinispan.org/docs/8.0.x/user_guide/user_guide.html#_enable_compatibility_mode[compatibility
mode] will prevent this from occurring and you are unable to use these
configurations together.

=== Eviction Type limitation

Due to the complexity of LIRS, memory based eviction is only supported
with LRU at this time. See the types
http://infinispan.org/docs/8.0.x/user_guide/user_guide.html#_eviction_strategies[here]. 
This could be enhanced at a later point, but is also not planned.


== How to enable

You can enable memory based eviction either through programmatic or
declarative configuration.  Note that Infinispan added long support
(limited to 2^48) for the size value which directly helps memory based
eviction if users want to utilize caches larger than 2 GB.

=== Programmatic



=== Declarative 



== 

== Supported JVMs

This was tested and written specifically for Oracle and OpenJDK JVMs. 
In testing these JVMs showed memory accuracy within 1% of desired value.
Other JVMs may shown incorrect values.

The algorithm takes into account JVM options, such as compressed
pointers and 32 bit JVM vs 64 bit JVM.  Keep in mind this is only for
the data container and doesn't take into account additional overhead
such as created threads or other runtime objects.

Other JVMs are not handled such as the IBM JVM which was briefly tested
and showed incorrect numbers greater than 10% of the desired amount. 
Support for other JVMs can be added later as interest is shown for
them.


== Closing Notes


I hope this feature helps people to better handle their memory
constraints while using Infinispan!  Let us know if you have any
http://infinispan.org/getinvolved/[feedback or concerns].

Cheers!

 - Will
