---
layout: blog
title: New Redis Cache Store Introduced in Infinispan 8
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/new-redis-cache-store-introduced-in
date: '2015-09-14T00:40:00.000-07:00'
author: Unknown
tags: [ "release",
"redis",
"cache store",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-6539755624644109074
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2015/09/new-redis-cache-store-introduced-in.html
---
A new cache store for storage of cache data within the Redis key/value
server has been introduced with Infinispan 8. This allows all storage of
cache data to be stored in a centralised Redis deployment which all
Infinispan clients access.



The cache store supports 3 Redis deployment topologies. They are, single
server, Sentinel and cluster (Redis v3 required). Redis versions 2.8+
and 3.0+ are currently supported.



Data expiration and purging is handled via Redis itself, reducing
workload from Infinispan servers to manually delete cache entries.



== *Topologies*

=== *Single Server*

In a single server deployment, the cache store is given the location of
a Redis master server with which it connects to directly to handle all
data storage. Using this topology, Redis has no fault tolerance unless a
custom solution is built on top of Redis. To declare a single server
local cache store:





<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<infinispan

    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"

    xsi:schemaLocation="urn:infinispan:config:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-config-8.0.xsd

                          urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-cachestore-redis-config-8.0.xsd"

    xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:8.0"

    xmlns:redis="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0" >



    <cache-container>

        <local-cache>

            <persistence passivation="false">

                <redis-store
xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0"

                    topology="server" socket-timeout="10000"
connection-timeout="10000">

                    <redis-server host="server1" />

                    <connection-pool min-idle="6" max-idle="10"
max-total="20" min-evictable-idle-time="30000"
time-between-eviction-runs="30000" />

                </redis-store>

            </persistence>

        </local-cache>

    </cache-container>

</infinispan>





Note the topology attribute is declared as *server*. This is needed to
ensure a single server Redis topology is applied by the cache store.
Only a single Redis server need be declared (only the first server will
be used if multiple servers are declared) and the port will default to
the Redis port 6379, but can be overridden using the port attribute. All
connections are handled via a connection pool, which can optionally also
test the validity of a connection on creation, lease, return from and
when idling in the connection the pool.

=== *Sentinel*

The Sentinel topology relies on Redis Sentinel servers to connect to a
Redis master server. Here, Infinispan connects to Redis Sentinel
servers, requesting a master server name, then gets forwarded on to the
correct location of the Redis master server. This topology gives
resilience via Redis Sentinel, providing failure detection and automatic
failover of Redis servers.





<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<infinispan

    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"

    xsi:schemaLocation="urn:infinispan:config:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-config-8.0.xsd

                          urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-cachestore-redis-config-8.0.xsd"

    xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:8.0"

    xmlns:redis="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0" >



    <cache-container>

        <local-cache>

            <persistence passivation="false">

                <redis-store
xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0"

                    topology="sentinel" master-name="mymaster"
socket-timeout="10000" connection-timeout="10000">

                    <sentinel-server host="server1" />

                    <sentinel-server host="server2" />

                    <sentinel-server host="server3" />

                    <connection-pool min-idle="6" max-idle="10"
max-total="20" min-evictable-idle-time="30000"
time-between-eviction-runs="30000" />

                </redis-store>

            </persistence>

        </local-cache>

    </cache-container>

</infinispan>





For a Sentinel deployment, the topology attribute changes to *sentinel*.
A master name must also be specified to select the correct Redis master
required as Sentinel can monitor multiple Redis master servers. The
Sentinel server is declared using a sentinel-server XML tag, which
you’ll notice is different to the main Redis servers used in single
server and cluster topologies. This is to allow defaulting of the
Sentinel port to 26379 if not declared. At least one Sentinel server
must be declared, though if you run more Sentinel servers, they should
all be declared too for the benefit of failure detection of the Sentinel
servers themselves.

=== *Cluster*

A cluster topology gives Infinispan the ability to connect to a Redis
cluster. One or more cluster nodes are declared to infinispan (the more
the better) which are then used to store all data. Redis cluster
supports failure detection so if a master node in the cluster fails, a
slave takes over. Redis v3 is required to run a Redis cluster.





<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<infinispan

    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"

    xsi:schemaLocation="urn:infinispan:config:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-config-8.0.xsd

                          urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-cachestore-redis-config-8.0.xsd"

    xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:8.0"

    xmlns:redis="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0" >



    <cache-container>

        <local-cache>

            <persistence passivation="false">

                <redis-store
xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0"

                    topology="cluster" socket-timeout="10000"
connection-timeout="10000">

                    <redis-server host="server1" port="6379" />

                    <redis-server host="server2" port="6379" />

                    <redis-server host="server3" port="6379" />

                    <connection-pool min-idle="6" max-idle="10"
max-total="20" min-evictable-idle-time="30000"
time-between-eviction-runs="30000" />

                </redis-store>

            </persistence>

        </local-cache>

    </cache-container>

</infinispan>





For cluster deployments, the topology attribute must change to
*cluster.* One or more Redis cluster nodes must be declared to access
the cluster which uses the redis-server XML tag. Note that when
operating a cluster, database IDs are not supported.



== *Multiple Cache Stores, Single Redis Deployment*

Redis single server and Sentinel deployments support the option of
database IDs. A database ID allows a single Redis server to host
multiple individual databases, referenced via an integer ID number. This
allows Infinispan to support multiple cache stores on the same Redis
deployment, isolating the data between the stores. Redis cluster does
not support the database ID. A database ID is defined using the database
attribute on the redis-store XML tag.





<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<infinispan

    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"

    xsi:schemaLocation="urn:infinispan:config:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-config-8.0.xsd

                          urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-cachestore-redis-config-8.0.xsd"

    xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:8.0"

    xmlns:redis="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0" >



    <cache-container>

        <local-cache>

            <persistence passivation="false">

                <redis-store
xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0"

                    topology="sentinel" master-name="mymaster"
socket-timeout="10000" connection-timeout="10000" database="5">

                    <sentinel-server host="server1" />

                    <sentinel-server host="server2" />

                    <sentinel-server host="server3" />

                    <connection-pool min-idle="6" max-idle="10"
max-total="20" min-evictable-idle-time="30000"
time-between-eviction-runs="30000" />

                </redis-store>

            </persistence>

        </local-cache>

    </cache-container>

</infinispan>


== *Redis Password Authentication*

In order to secure access to a Redis server, a password can optionally
be used in Redis. This then requires the cache store to declare the
password when connecting. The password is added via a password attribute
on the redis-store XML tag.





<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<infinispan

    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"

    xsi:schemaLocation="urn:infinispan:config:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-config-8.0.xsd

                          urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0
http://www.infinispan.org/schemas/infinispan-cachestore-redis-config-8.0.xsd"

    xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:8.0"

    xmlns:redis="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0" >



    <cache-container>

        <local-cache>

            <persistence passivation="false">

                <redis-store
xmlns="urn:infinispan:config:store:redis:8.0"

                    topology="sentinel" master-name="mymaster"
socket-timeout="10000" connection-timeout="10000" password="mysecret">

                    <sentinel-server host="server1" />

                    <sentinel-server host="server2" />

                    <sentinel-server host="server3" />

                    <connection-pool min-idle="6" max-idle="10"
max-total="20" min-evictable-idle-time="30000"
time-between-eviction-runs="30000" />

                </redis-store>

            </persistence>

        </local-cache>

    </cache-container>

</infinispan>


== *What about SSL support?*

Redis does not provide protocol encryption, instead leaving this to
other specialist software. At this time, the Redis client used to
integrate Infinispan with Redis servers (Jedis) does not yet support SSL
connection negotiation natively.

**
