---
layout: blog
title: Expiration Enhancements
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/expiration-enhancements
date: '2015-10-26T08:34:00.000-07:00'
author: infinispan
tags: []
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-5108391745247132049
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2015/10/expiration-enhancements.html
---
Infinispan has supported expiration now for quite some time.  However
there have always been some nuances with how it operated, and with this
latest wave of enhancements, we hope that they are mostly covered.


== Existing Behaviours


The following describe how expiration works in certain circumstances
with Infinispan 7 or older.


=== Max Idle

Max Idle, I would say is the black sheep of clustered expiration.  It
works great with a single node, but if you have a cluster where a key is
accessed on different nodes the recent access time is not in sync.  When
a clustered cache is used with max idle this can make some nodes contain
data and some others to not, it can be a bit confusing.


=== Single node expiration

Expiration has only ever took place on a per node basis.  That is that
the entry is only removed from a node when it has that key accessed or
the reaper thread finds it.  This means that the different nodes can
have different amount of entries (although expired entries - don't show
up).


=== Expiration Event?

When an entry expires it should raise an expiration event, correct? 
Infinispan didn't have such an event, instead an invalidation event was
raised.  This could be for obvious reasons a bit confusing.  The worst
part is that the event is raised on each node at possibly different
times since the entries aren't removed at approximately the same time.


== New Enhancements


The following are new enhancements added with Infinispan 8 to allow for
better handling of entries expiring.


=== Cluster wide expiration 

When an entry in a replicated or distributed cache expires it will now
expire that entry across the entire cluster at once.

When an entry expires on one node (either by access or reaper thread)
that node will asynchronously send a remove expired command.  This
command runs just like a remove except it has some conditional values
such as checking for the lifespan and value to make sure they match
before actually removing the entry.  This is to prevent a concurrent
write from being overwritten.  This then ensures that the entry is
removed from all nodes at approximately the same time.

Unfortunately cluster wide expiration is not as safe when an entry
expires from a store and it wasn't in memory.  In very rare
circumstances, it can overwrite a concurrent update.  This case is very
rare because entries only expire from a store when the reaper thread
runs, you would then have to have a concurrent put at the precise moment
the reaper thread is expiring that entry.  This is because the API for
cache store expiration only exposes the key and doesn't include the
value or metadata.  This is planned to be enhanced hopefully somewhat
soon though!


=== Yes, Expiration Events!

Infinispan also has added a new event,
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/8.0/apidocs/org/infinispan/notifications/cachelistener/event/CacheEntryExpiredEvent.html[CacheEntryExpired]. 
This is fired whenever an entry expires or is removed due to a cluster
wide expiration.  Note in the latter case, the event is raised across
the entire cluster at the same time, which also includes only receiving
a cluster expiration event.

Also there was a bug here where the event was only raised for store
expirations, in memory expirations never even raised an event, doh!


== Unchanged



=== Max Idle

Unfortunately, max idle is unchanged in the latest enhancements. 
Implementing a correct max idle is a very network costly operation as
you would have to send updates to other nodes.  Instead it is highly
recommended to not use max idle in a clustered cache as it can cause
unexpected behaviour (where an entry may expire early even though it was
accessed recently).


== Other Remarks



=== Concurrent expiration access

There is an interesting case when using a clustered cache and you have
an expired entry.  If that entry is read from multiple nodes at the same
time it can cause more than 1 expiration event to occur.  If this does
occur the first event will contain the value (if applicable) and any
others will show a null value.


=== What do I need to change?

The new expiration changes come along for free, no configuration etc.
required.  However if you were listening to cache entry invalidation
events for entries expiring you should change your Listener to use the
new annotation.  Other than that everything should just work!


=== I have a question or concern

If you have any questions or concerns please get in contact with
http://infinispan.org/getinvolved/[us]!
