---
layout: blog
title: Hibernate Second Level Cache improvements
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/hibernate-second-level-cache
date: '2015-10-01T06:41:00.003-07:00'
author: Unknown
tags: [ "jpa",
"hibernate",
"second level cache provider",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-2426495200310961025
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2015/10/hibernate-second-level-cache.html
---
Infinispan has been implementing *Hibernate Second Level Cache* for a
long time, replacing the previous JBoss Cache implementation with very
similar logic. The main aim of the implementation has always been to
have very fast reads, keeping the overhead of cache during reads on
minimum. This was achieved using local reads in invalidation-mode cache
and Infinispan's _putForExternalRead_ operation, where the request to
cache never blocks.

Recently we've looked on the implementation again to see whether we can
speed it up even more. For a long time you could use only transactional
caches to keep the cache in sync with database. However transactions
come at some cost so we thought about a way to get around it. And we
have found it, through custom interceptors we have managed to do
two-phase updates to the cache and now the non-transactional caches are
the default configuration. So, if you're using Hibernate with your own
configuration, don't forget to update that when migrating to Hibernate
ORM 5!

With transactions gone, our task was not over. So far entity/collection
caching has been implemented for invalidation mode caches, but it's
tempting to consider replication mode, too. For replicated caches, we
got rid of a special cache for _pending puts_ (this local cache detects
out-of-date reads, keeping the entity cache consistent). Instead, we
used different technique where a logical removal from the cache is
substituted by replace with a token called _tombstone_, and updates
pre-invalidate the cache in a similar way. This change opened the
possibility for *non-transactional replicated* and *distributed* caches
(transactional mode is not supported). We were pleased to see the
results of some benchmark where the high hit ratio in replicated caches
has dramatically speeded up all operations.

There is one downside of the current implementation - in replication
mode, you *should not use eviction*, as eviction cannot tell regular
entity (which can be evicted) from the tombstone. If tombstone was
evicted, there's a risk of inconsistent reads. So when using replicated
caches, you should rely on expiration to keep your cache slender. We
hope that eventually we'll remove this limitation.

All modes described above give us cache without any stale reads. That
comes at a cost - each modification (insert, update or removal) requires
2 accesses to the cache (though, sometimes the second access can be
asynchronous). Some applications do not require such strict consistency
- and that's where _nonstrict-read-write_ comes to the scene. Here we
guarantee that the cache will provide the same result as DB after the
modifying transaction commits - between DB commit and transaction commit
a stale value can be provided. If you use asynchronous cache, this may
be delayed even more but unless the operation fails (e.g. due to locking
timeout) the cache will eventually get into a state consistent with DB.
This allows us to limit modifications to single cache access per
modification.

Note that _nonstrict-read-write_ mode is supported only for *versioned*
entities/collections (that way we can find out which entity is actually
newer). Also, you cannot use eviction in nonstrict-read-write mode, for
the same reason as in tombstone-based modes. Invalidation cache mode is
not supported neither.

If you'll try out the most recent Hibernate ORM, you'll find out that
*Infinispan 7.2.x* is used there. This is because ORM 5.0.0.Final was
released before Infinispan 8.0.0.Final went out and we can't change the
major version of dependency in micro-release. However, we try to keep
*Infinispan 8.0.x* binary compatible (in parts used by Hibernate), and
therefore you can just replace the dependencies on classpath and use the
most recent Infinispan, if you prefer to do so.

To sum things up, here is the table of supported configurations:




Concurrency strategy

Cache transactions

Cache mode

Implementation

Eviction

transactional

transactional

invalidation

pending puts

yes

read-write

non-transactional

non-transactional

replicated/distributed

tombstones

no

nonstrict-read-write

versioned entries


There's also the _read-only_ mode - this can be used instead of both
_transactional_ or _read-write_ modes, but at this point it does not
offer any further performance gains, since we have to make sure that you
don't see a removed value. Actually, it also does not matter whether you
specify transactional or read-write mode; the proper strategy will be
picked according to your cache configuration (transactional vs.
non-transactional).

We hope that you'll try these new modes and many consistency fixes
included along (you should use Hibernate ORM *5.0.2.Final* or later),
and tell us about your experience.

Happy caching!

