---
layout: blog
title: Composing the Infinispan Docker image
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/composing-infinispan-docker-image
date: '2016-12-05T03:42:00.000-08:00'
author: Gustavo Fernandes
tags: [ "compose",
"jdbc",
"docker",
"persistence",
"server",
"modules",
"oracle",
"cache store",
]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-4984211490250460785
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2016/12/composing-infinispan-docker-image.html
---

In the
http://blog.infinispan.org/2016/10/infinispan-docker-image-custom.html[previous]
post we showed how to manipulate the Infinispan Docker container
configuration at both runtime and boot time.

Before diving into multi-host Docker usage, in this post we'll explore
how to create multi-container Docker applications involving Infinispan
with the help of https://docs.docker.com/compose/[Docker Compose].

For this we'll look at a typical scenario of an Infinispan server backed
by an Oracle database as a cache store.

All the code for this sample can be found on
https://github.com/gustavonalle/infinispan-docker-compose[github].


===  

=== Infinispan with Oracle JDBC cache store

===  


In order to have a cache with persistence with Oracle, we need to do
some configuration: configure the driver in the server, create the data
source associated with the driver, and configure the cache itself with
JDBC persistence.


Let's take a look at each of those steps:

===== Obtaining and configuring the driver

The driver (ojdbc6.jar) should be
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/apps-tech/jdbc-112010-090769.html[downloaded]
and placed in the 'driver' folder of the sample project.

The module.xml declaration used to make it available on the server is as
follows:




===== Configuring the Data source

The data source is configured in the "datasource" element of the server
configuration file as shown below:



and inside the "datasource/drivers" element, we need to declare the
driver:




===== Creating the cache

The last piece is to define a cache with the proper JDBC Store:




===== Putting all together

From now on, without using Docker we'd be ready to download and install
Oracle following the specific instructions for your OS, then download
the Infinispan Server, edit the configuration files, copy over the
driver jar, figure out how to launch the database and server, taking
care not to have any port conflicts.

If it sounds too much work, it's because it really is. Wouldn't it be
nice to have all these wired together and launched with a simple command
line? Let's take a look at the Docker way next. 

=== Enter Docker Compose


Docker Compose is a tool part of the Docker stack to facilitate
configuration, execution and management of related Docker containers.

By describing the application aspects in a single yaml file, it allows
centralized control of the containers, including custom configuration
and parameters, and it also allows runtime interactions with each of the
exposed services.


===== Composing Infinispan

Our Docker Compose file to assemble the application is given below:


It contains two services:

* one called *_oracle_* that uses the
https://hub.docker.com/r/wnameless/oracle-xe-11g/[wnameless/oracle-xe-11g]
Docker image, with an environment variable to allow remote connections.
*  another one called _*infinispan*_ that uses version 8.2.5.Final of
the
https://store.docker.com/community/images/jboss/infinispan-server[Infinispan
Server image]. It is launched with a custom command pointing to the
changed configuration file and it also mounts two volumes in the
container: one for the driver and its module.xml and another for the
folder holding our server xml configuration.

===== Launching

To start the application, just execute



To inspect the status of the containers:



To follow the Infinispan server logs, use:



Infinispan usually starts faster than the database, and since the server
waits until the database is ready (more on that later), keep an eye in
the log output for "Infinispan Server 8.2.5.Final (WildFly Core
2.0.10.Final) started". After that, both Infinispan and Oracle are
properly initialized.

===== Testing it

Let's insert a value using the Rest endpoint from Infinispan and verify
it was saved to the Oracle database:



To check the Oracle database, we can attach to the container and use
Sqlplus:




===== Other operations


It's also possible to increase and decrease the number of containers for
each of the services:





=== A thing or two about startup order

===  

When dealing with dependent containers in Docker based environments,
it's highly recommended to make the connection obtention between parties
robust enough so that the fact that one dependency is not totally
initialized doesn't cause the whole application to fail when starting.

Although Compose does have a *_depends_on_* instruction, it simply
starts the containers in the declared order but it has no means to
detected when a certain container is fully initialized and ready to
serve requests before launching a dependent one.

One may be tempted to simply write some glue script to detect if a
certain port is open, but that does not work in practice: the network
socket may be opened, but the background service could still be in
transient initialization state.

The recommended solution for this it to make whoever depends on a
service to retry periodically until the dependency is ready. On the
Infinispan + Oracle case, we specifically configured the data source
with retries to avoid failing at once if the database is not ready:


When starting the application via Compose you'll notice that Infinispan
print some WARN with connection exceptions until Oracle is available:
don't panic, this is expected!



=== Conclusion


Docker Compose is a powerful and easy to use tool to launch applications
involving multiple containers: in this post it allowed to start
Infinispan plus Oracle with custom configurations with a single
command.
It's also a handy tool to have during development and testing phase of a
project, specially when using/evaluating Infinispan with its many
possible integrations.

Be sure to check other examples of using Docker Compose involving
Infinispan: the
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan-spark/tree/master/examples/twitter[Infinispan+Spark
Twitter demo], and the
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan-hadoop/tree/master/samples/flink[Infinispan+Apache
Flink] demo.


