---
layout: blog
title: Reactive Big Data on OpenShift In-Memory Data Grids
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/reactive-big-data-on-openshift-in
date: '2017-05-05T02:54:00.000-07:00'
author: galder
tags: [ "conference",
"demo",
]
thumbnail: https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-mu5jN_vRnVk/WQxMd3Ev8aI/AAAAAAAAE2g/R2hUTM9_d4U3sPWsmKl8VyEwoLPwR-VhwCLcB/s72-c/real-time-demo.jpg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-6817289187913426434
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2017/05/reactive-big-data-on-openshift-in.html
---
Thanks a lot to everyone who attended the Infinispan sessions I gave in
http://www.developermarch.com/developersummit/[Great Indian Developer
Summit]! Your questions after the talks were really insightful.



One of the talks I gave was titled
http://www.developermarch.com/developersummit/session.html?insert=Galder1[Big
Data In Action with Infinispan] (slides are available
https://speakerdeck.com/galderz/big-data-in-action-with-infinispan[here]),
where I was looking at how Infinispan based in-memory data grids can
help you deal with the problems of real-time big data and how to do big
data analytics.



During the talk I live coded a demo showing both real-time and analytics
parts, running on top of https://www.openshift.org/[OpenShift] and using
http://vertx.io/[Vert.x] for joining the different parts. The demo
repository contains background information on
https://github.com/galderz/swiss-transport-datagrid/blob/master/README.md[instructions]
to get started with the demo, but I thought it'd be useful to get
focused step-by-step instructions in this blog post.



=== Set Up



Before we start with any of the demos, it's necessary to run some set up
steps:



    1. Check out git repository:

    

        git clone https://github.com/galderz/swiss-transport-datagrid



    2. Install https://www.openshift.org/[OpenShift Origin] or
https://www.openshift.org/minishift/[Minishift] to get an OpenShift
environment running in your own 

        machine. I decided to use OpenShift Origin, so the instructions
below are tailored for that 

        environment, but similar instructions could be used with
Minishift.



    3. Install https://www.continuum.io/downloads[Anaconda for Python
3], this is required to run Jupyter notebook for plotting.



=== Demo Domain



Once the set up is complete, it's time to talk about the demos before we
run them.



Both demos shown below work with the same application domain: swiss rail
transport systems. In this domain, we differentiate between physical
stations, trains, station boards which are located in stations, and
finally stops, which are individual entries in station boards.



=== Real Time Demo



The first demo is about working with real-time data from station boards
around the country and presenting a centralised dashboard of delayed
trains around the country. The following diagrams shows how the
following components interact with each other to achieve this:



https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-mu5jN_vRnVk/WQxMd3Ev8aI/AAAAAAAAE2g/R2hUTM9_d4U3sPWsmKl8VyEwoLPwR-VhwCLcB/s1600/real-time-demo.jpg[image:https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-mu5jN_vRnVk/WQxMd3Ev8aI/AAAAAAAAE2g/R2hUTM9_d4U3sPWsmKl8VyEwoLPwR-VhwCLcB/s640/real-time-demo.jpg[image,width=640,height=268]]





Infinispan, which provides the in-memory data grid storage, and Vert.x,
which provides the glue for the centralised delayed dashboard to
interact with Infinispan, all run within OpenShift cloud. 



Within the cloud, the Injector verticle cycles through station board
data and injects it into Infinispan. Also within the cloud, a Vert.x
verticle that uses
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#query.continuous[Infinispan's
Continuous Query] to listen for station board entries that are delayed,
and these are pushed into the Vert.x event bus, which in turn, via a
http://vertx.io/docs/vertx-web/java/#_sockjs_event_bus_bridge[SockJS
bridge], get consumed via WebSockets from the dashboard. The centralised
dashboards is written with
http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/get-started-tutorial/jfx-overview.htm#JFXST784[JavaFX]
and runs outside the cloud.



To run the demo, do the following:



    1. Start OpenShift Origin if you've not already done so:



        oc cluster up --public-hostname=127.0.0.1



    2. Deploy all the OpenShift cloud components:



        cd ~/swiss-transport-datagrid

        ./deploy-all.sh



    3. Open the
https://127.0.0.1:8443/console/project/myproject/overview[OpenShift
console] and verify that all pods are up.



    4. Load github repository into your favourite IDE and run

        *delays.query.continuous.fx.FxApp* Java FX application. This
will load the

        centralised dashboard. Within seconds delayed trains will start
appearing. For example:



https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-vyFHhzmswQg/WOdJ1PnoOJI/AAAAAAAAE2E/s7k6FScITP87Kdq4nxTZ-NelS_FsrOgMQCPcB/s1600/Screen%2BShot%2B2017-04-07%2Bat%2B10.11.40.png[image:https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-vyFHhzmswQg/WOdJ1PnoOJI/AAAAAAAAE2E/s7k6FScITP87Kdq4nxTZ-NelS_FsrOgMQCPcB/s320/Screen%2BShot%2B2017-04-07%2Bat%2B10.11.40.png[image,width=320,height=248]]



=== Analytics Demo



The first demo is focused on how you can use Infinispan for doing
offline analytics. In particular, this demo tries to answer the
following question:



_Q. What is the time of the day when there is the biggest ratio of
delayed trains?_



Once again, this demo runs on top of OpenShift cloud, uses Infinispan as
in-memory data grid for storage and Vert.x for glueing components
together.



To answer this question, Infinispan data grid will be loaded with 3
weeks worth of data from station boards using a Vert.x verticle. Once
the data is loaded, the Jupyter notebook will invoke an HTTP restful
endpoint which will invoke an Vert.x verticle called
*AnalyticsVerticle*. 



This verticle will invoke a remote server task which will use
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#streams[Infinispan
Distributed Java Streams] to calculate the two pieces of information
required to answer the question: per hour, how many trains are going
through the system, and out of those, how many are delayed.



An important aspect to bear in mind about this server tasks is that it
will only be executed in one of the nodes in the cluster. It does not
matter which one. In turn, this node will will ship the lambdas required
to do the computation to each of the nodes so that they can executed
against their local data. The other nodes will reply with the results
and the node where the server task was invoked will aggregate the
results.



The results will be sent back to the originating invoker, the Jupyter
notebook which will plot the results. The following diagrams shows how
the following components interact with each other to achieve this:


https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-0BKwklL6rZE/WQxMl-NCG-I/AAAAAAAAE2k/Z0SZLEhVz4YLIkh3AM8p8EMOW0EN-KMGwCLcB/s1600/analytics-demo.jpg[image:https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-0BKwklL6rZE/WQxMl-NCG-I/AAAAAAAAE2k/Z0SZLEhVz4YLIkh3AM8p8EMOW0EN-KMGwCLcB/s640/analytics-demo.jpg[image,width=640,height=354]]



Here is the demo step-by-step guide:



    1. Start OpenShift Origin and deploy all components as shown in
previous demo.



    2. Start the Jupyter notebook:



        cd ~/swiss-transport-datagrid/analytics/analytics-jupyter

        ~/anaconda/bin/jupyter notebook



    3.  Once the notebook opens, click open live-demo.ipynb notebook and
execute each of the cells in order. You should end up seeing a plot like
this:



https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-0WwGpCjfU1g/WOdG4rNJ8QI/AAAAAAAAE14/5Lmb3xhx0345zsWn5f_DGI1v-nIEvwzwQCPcB/s1600/Screen%2BShot%2B2017-04-07%2Bat%2B09.58.56.png[image:https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-0WwGpCjfU1g/WOdG4rNJ8QI/AAAAAAAAE14/5Lmb3xhx0345zsWn5f_DGI1v-nIEvwzwQCPcB/s320/Screen%2BShot%2B2017-04-07%2Bat%2B09.58.56.png[image,width=320,height=240]]



So, the answer to the question:



_Q. What is the time of the day when there is the biggest ratio of
delayed trains?_

https://www.blogger.com/blogger.g?blogID=5717179571414330874[]https://www.blogger.com/blogger.g?blogID=5717179571414330874[]https://www.blogger.com/blogger.g?blogID=5717179571414330874[]

is *2am*! That's because last connecting trains of the day wait for each
other to avoid leaving passengers stranded.



=== Conclusion



This has been a summary of the demos that I presented
at http://www.developermarch.com/developersummit/[Great Indian Developer
Summit] with the intention of getting you running these demos as quickly
as possible. The repository contains more detailed information of these
demos. If there's anything unclear or any of the instructions above are
not working, please let us know!



Once again, a very special thanks to Alexandre Masselot for being the
inspiration for these demos. Merci @Alex!!



Over the next few months we will be enhancing the demo and hopefully
we'll be able to do some more live demonstrations at other conferences.



Cheers,

Galder
