---
layout: blog
title: Conflict Management and Partition Handling
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/conflict-management-and-partition
date: '2017-07-17T05:09:00.000-07:00'
author: remerson
tags: [ "partition handling" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-5340222105416259030
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2017/07/conflict-management-and-partition.html
---
In Infinispan 9.1.0.Final we have overhauled the behaviour and
configuration
of http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#partition_handling[partition
handling] in distributed and replicated caches.  Partition handling is
no longer simply enabled/disabled, instead a partition strategy is
configured. This allows for more fine-grained control of a cache's
behaviour when a split brain occurs. Furthermore, we have created
the https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.1/apidocs/org/infinispan/conflict/ConflictManager.html[ConflictManager] component
so that conflicts on cache entries can be automatically resolved
on-demand by users and/or automatically during partition merges .



== Conflict Manager


During a cache's lifecycle it is possible for inconsistencies to appear
between replicas of a cache entry  due to a variety of reasons (e.g
replication failures, incorrect use of flags etc).  The conflict manager
is a tool that allows users to retrieve all stored replica values for a
cache entry. In addition to allowing users to process a stream of cache
entries whose stored replicas have conflicting values. Furthermore, by
utilising implementations of the
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.1/apidocs/org/infinispan/conflict/EntryMergePolicy.html[EntryMergePolicy]
interface it is possible for said conflicts to be resolved
deterministically.


=== 

=== EntryMergePolicy



In the event of conflicts arising between one or more replicas of a
given CacheEntry, it is necessary for a conflict resolution algorithm to
be defined, therefore we provide the EntryMergePolicy interface. This
interface consists of a single method, "merge", whose output is utilised
as the "resolved" CacheEntry for a given key. A non-null return value is
put to all replicas of the CacheEntry in question, whereas a null return
value results in all replicas being removed from the cache.



The merge method takes two parameters: the "preferredEntry" and
"otherEntries". In the context of a partition merge, the preferredEntry
is the CacheEntry associated with the partition whose coordinator is
conducting the merge (or if multiple entries exist in this partition,
it’s the primary replica). However, in all other contexts, the
preferredEntry is simply the primary replica. The second parameter,
"otherEntries" is simply a list of all other entries associated with the
key for which a conflict was detected.



Currently Infinispan provides the following implementations of
EntryMergePolicy:





[cols=", ",options="header" ]
|=======================================================================
|Policy |Description
|MergePolicies.PREFERRED_ALWAYS |Always utilise the "preferredEntry".

|MergePolicies.PREFERRED_NON_NULL |Utilise the "preferredEntry" if it is
non-null, otherwise utilise the first entry from "otherEntries".

|MergePolicies.REMOVE_ALL |Always remove a key from the cache when a
conflict is detected.
|=======================================================================



=== Application Usage



For conflict resolution during partition merges, once an
EntryMergePolicy has been configured for the cache, no additional
actions are required by the user.  However, if an Infinispan user would
like to utilise the ConflictManager explicitly in their application, it
should be retrieved by passing an AdvancedCache instance to the
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.1/apidocs/org/infinispan/conflict/ConflictManagerFactory.html[ConflictManagerFactory]. 



Note, that depending on the number of entries in the cache, the
getConflicts and resolveConflict methods are expensive operations, as
they both depend on a spliterator which lazily loads cache entries on a
per segment basis. Consequently, when operating in distributed mode, if
many conflicts exist, it is possible for an OutOfMemoryException to
occur on the node searching for conflicts.

== Partition Handling Strategies



In 9.1.0.Final the partition handling enabled/disabled option has been
deprecated and users must now configure an appropriate PartitionHandling
strategy for their application. A partition handling strategy determines
what operations can be performed on a cache when a split brain event has
occurred. Ultimately, in terms of
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem[Brewer’s CAP theorem], the
configured strategy determines whether the cache's availability or
consistency is sacrificed in the presence of partition(s). Below is a
table of the provided strategies and their characteristics:




[cols=",,",options="header" ]
|=======================================================================
|Strategy |Description |CAP
|DENY_READ_WRITES |If the partition does not have all owners for a given
segment, both reads and writes are denied for all keys in that
segment.

This is equivalent to setting partition handling to true in Infinispan
9.0. |Consistency

|ALLOW_READS |Allows reads for a given key if it exists in this
partition, but only allows writes if this partition contains all owners
of a segment. |Availability

|ALLOW_READ_WRITES |Allow entries on each partition to diverge, with
conflicts resolved during merge.

This is equivalent to setting partition handling to false in Infinispan
9.0. |Availability
|=======================================================================



== 

=== Conflict Resolution on Partition Merge


When utilising the ALLOW_READ_WRITES partition strategy it is possible
for the values of cache entries to diverge between competing partitions.
Therefore, when the two partitions merge, it is necessary for these
conflicts to be resolved. Internally Infinispan utilises a cache's
ConflictManager to search for cache entry conflicts and then applies the
configured EntryMergePolicy to automatically resolve said conflicts
before rebalancing the cache. This conflict resolution is completely
automatic and does not require any additional code or input from
Infinispan users.



Note, that if you do not want conflicts to be resolved automatically
during a partition merge, i.e. the behaviour before 9.1.x, you can set
the merge-policy to null (or NONE in xml). 

== 

== 



=== Configuration

==== 

===== Programmatic





==== XML







== Conclusion



Partition handling has been overhauled in Infinispan 9.1.0.Final to
allow for increased control over a cache's behaviour. We have introduced
the ConflictManager which enables users to inspect and manage the
consistency of their cache entries via custom and provided merge
policies.


If you have any feedback on the partition handling changes, or would
like to request some new features/optimisations, let us know via
the https://developer.jboss.org/en/infinispan/content[forum], https://issues.jboss.org/projects/ISPN[issue
tracker] or the #infinispan channel
onhttp://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=%23infinispan[ Freenode].

