---
layout: blog
title: Data Container Changes Part 2
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/data-container-changes-part-2
date: '2017-01-23T13:35:00.002-08:00'
author: wburns
tags: [data, storage]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-3597184894679767136
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2017/01/data-container-changes-part-2.html
---
Before the end of the year I wrote a
http://blog.infinispan.org/2016/12/data-container-changes-part-1.html[blog
post] detailing some of the more recent changes that Infinispan
introduced with the in memory data container.  As was mentioned in the
previous post we would be detailing some other new changes. If you poked
around in our new
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.0/configdocs/infinispan-config-9.0.html[schema]
after Beta 1 you may have spoiled the surprise for yourself.

With the upcoming 9.0 Beta 2, I am excited to announce that Infinispan
will have support for entries being stored *off heap*, as in outside of
the JVM heap. This has some interesting benefits and drawbacks, but we
hope you can agree the benefits in many cases far outweigh the
drawbacks. But before we get into that lets first see how you can
configure your cache to utilize off heap.


== New Configuration


The off heap configuration is another option under the new memory
element that was discussed in the previous post. It is used in the same
way that either OBJECT or BINARY is used.  You can use either COUNT or
MEMORY eviciton types, the example below shows the latter.

=== XML



=== DECLARATIVE

As you can see the configuration is almost identical to the other types
of storage. The only real difference is the new address pointer
argument, which will be explained below.


== Requirements


Our off heap implementation supports all existing features of
Infinispan. There are some limitations and drawbacks of using the
feature. This section will describe these in further detail.


=== Serialization


Off Heap runs in essentially BINARY mode, which requires entries to be
serialized into their byte[] forms. Thus all keys and entries must be
Serializable or have provided Infinispan
http://infinispan.org/docs/dev/user_guide/user_guide.html#marshalling[Externalizers].


=== Size


Currently a key and a value must be able to be stored in a byte[].
Therefore a key or value in serialized form cannot be more than just
over 2 Gigabytes.  This could be enhanced possibly at a later point, if
the need arose.  I hope you aren't transferring this over your network
though!



== Implementation Details 


Our off heap implementation uses the Java Unsafe to allocate memory
outside of the Java heap. This data is stored as a bucket of linked list
pointers, just like a standard Java HashMap. When an entry is added the
key's serialized byte[] is hashed and an appropriate offset is found in
the bucket. Then the entry is added to the bucket as the first element
or if an entry(ies) is present it is added to the rear of the linked
list.

All of this data is protected by an array of ReadWriteLock instances. 
The number of address pointers is evenly divisible by the number of lock
instances.  The number of lock instances is how many cores your machines
doubled and rounded to the nearest power of two.  Thus each lock
protects an equivalent amount of address spaces.  This provides for good
lock granularity and reads will not block each other but unfortunately
writes will wait and block all reads.

If you are using a bounded off heap container either by count or memory
this will create a backing LRU doubly linked list to keep track of which
elements were accessed most recently and removes the least recently
accessed element when there are too many present in the cache.

===  

=== Memory Overhead


As with all cache implementations there is overhead required to store
these entries. We have a fixed and variable overhead which scales with
the amount of entries. I will detail these and briefly mention what they
are used for.

==== Fixed overhead

As was mentioned there is a new address count parameter when configuring
off heap. This value is used to determine how many linked list pointers
are available. Normally you want to have more node pointers than you
have entries in the cache, since then chances are you have one element
in each linked list.  This is very similar to the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/HashMap.html#HashMap%28int%29[int
argument constructor] for HashMap.  It is also rounded up to the nearest
power of two.  The big difference being that this off heap
implementation will not resize.  Thus your read/write times will be
slower if you have a lot of collisions. The overhead of a pointer is 8
bytes, so for approximately one million pointers it will be 8 Megabytes
of off heap.

Bounded off heap requires very little fixed memory, just 32 bytes for
head/tail pointers and a counter and an additional Java lock object.

==== Variable overhead

Unfortunately to store your entries we may need to wrap them with some
data. Thus for every entry you add to the cache we store an additional
25 bytes for each entry.  This data is used for header information and
also our linked list forward pointer.

Bounded off heap requires additional housekeeping for its LRU list
nodes.  Thus each entry adds an additional 36 bytes above the number
above. It is larger due to requiring a doubly linked list and having to
have pointers to and from the entry and eviction node.


=== Performance


The off heap container was designed with the intent that key lookups are
quite fast. In general these should be about the same performance.
However local reads and stream operations can be a little slower as
there is an additional deserialization phase required.


== Summary


We hope you all try out our new off heap feature! Please make sure to
contact us if you have any feedback, find any bugs or have any
questions!  You can get in contact with us on our
https://developer.jboss.org/en/infinispan/content[forum],
https://issues.jboss.org/projects/ISPN[issue tracker], or directly on
IRC freenode channel
http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=%23infinispan[Infinispan]. 
