---
layout: blog
title: Scattered cache
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/scattered-cache
date: '2017-07-03T13:49:00.001-07:00'
author: Radim Vansa
tags: [ "scattered cache" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-7123650778935854208
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2017/07/scattered-cache.html
---
Infinispan strives for high throughput and low latency. Version
9.1.0.CR1 comes with a new cache mode - scattered cache - that's our
answer to low round-trip times for write operations. Through a smart
routing algorithm it guarantees that the write operation will result in
only single RPC, where distributed caches with 2 owners would often use
2 RPCs. Scattered cache is resilient against single node failure (this
is equivalent to distributed cache with 2 owners) and does not support
transactions.

Declarative configuration is straigtforward:

and programmatic is a piece of cake, too:

What does the routing algorithm differently, then? In distributed cache,
one node is always designated as the _primary_ owner and the others
owners are _backups_. When a (non-owner) node does a write (invoke
`cache.put("k", "v")`), it sends the command to the primary owner,
primary forwards it to the backups and the operation is completed only
when all owners confirm this to the first node (_originator_). It's not
possible to contact all owners in a single multinode RPC from the
originator as the primary has to decide upon ordering in case of
concurrent writes.

In scattered cache every node may be the backup. We don't designate
backup owners in the routing table (also called _consistent hash_ for
historical reasons), only primaries are set there. When a node does a
write it sends the command to the primary owner and when this confirms
the operation the originator stores the entry locally, effectively
becoming a backup. That means that there can be more than 2 copies of
the entry in the cluster, the others being outdated - but only
temporarily, the other copies are eventually invalidated through a
background process that does not slow down the synchronous writes. As
you can see, this algorithm cannot be easily extended to multiple owners
(keeping the performance characteristics) and therefore scattered cache
does not support multiple backups.

In case of primary crash, the reconciliation process is somewhat more
complex, because there's no central record telling who are the backups.
Instead, the new primary owner has to search all nodes and pick the last
write - previous primary owner has assigned each entry a sequence number
which makes this possible. And there are more technical difficulties -
you can read about these in the
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan/blob/master/core/src/main/java/org/infinispan/scattered/package-info.java[design
document] or in the
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan/blob/master/documentation/src/main/asciidoc/user_guide/clustering.adoc#scattered-mode[documentation].

There is a con, of course. When reading an entry from a distributed
cache, there is some chance that the entry will be located on this node
(being one of the owners), and local reads are very fast. In scattered
cache we always read from the primary node, as the local version of the
entry might be already outdated. That halves the chance for a local read
- and this is the price you pay for faster writes. Don't worry too much,
though - we have plans for
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#l1_caching[L1-like
caching] that will make reads great again!
