---
layout: blog
title: 'Better Late than Never: Remote Cache collections'
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/better-late-than-never-remote-cache
date: '2017-10-02T09:40:00.001-07:00'
author: Tristan Tarrant
tags: [ " hotrod" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-1067286530354658911
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2017/10/better-late-than-never-remote-cache.html
---
One of the main benefits of Infinispan extending the java.util.Map
interface when we introduced our
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.1/apidocs/org/infinispan/Cache.html[Cache]
interfaceÂ  was that users would immediately be able to use a well
established and familiar API.

The unfortunate thing about this relationship is that now the Cache
interface also has to implement all of the other methods such as keySet,
values and entrySet. Originally Infinispan didn't implement these
collections or returned an immutable copy (requiring all elements to be
in memory). Neither choice is obviously desirable.

This all changed with
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-4836[ISPN-4836] which provided
backing implementations of keySet, values and entrySet collections. This
means that all methods were now provided and would keep up to date with
changes to the underlying Cache and updates to these collections would
be persisted down to the Cache. The implementation also didn't keep a
copy of all contents and instead allowed for memory efficient iteration.
And if the user still wanted to use a copy they could still do that, by
iterating over the collection and copying themselves. This later spring
boarded our implementation of Distributed Stream as well.

The problem was that the RemoteCache was left in the old state, where
some things weren't implemented and others were copies just like how
embedded caches used to be.

Well I can now gladly say with the release of Infinispan 9.1 that
RemoteCache now has backing implementations of keySet, values and
entrySet implemented via
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-7900[ISPN-7900]. Thus these
collections support all methods on these collections and are backed by
the underlying RemoteCache.


Unfortunately the Stream methods on these collections are not
distributed like embedded, but we hope to someday improve that as well.
Instead these streams must iterate over the cache to perform the
operations locally. By default these will pull 10,000 entries at a time
to try to make sure that memory is not overburdened on the client. If
you want to decrease this number (less memory - lower performance) or
increase (more memory - higher performance) you can tweak this by
changing the *batchSize* parameter via
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.1/apidocs/org/infinispan/client/hotrod/configuration/ConfigurationBuilder.html#batchSize-int-[ConfigurationBuilder]
or
**[.blob-code-inner]#[.pl-c]#infinispan.client.hotrod.batch_Size##**[.blob-code-inner]#[.pl-c]#
if you use a property based file.##

[.blob-code-inner]#[.pl-c]#You can read more about this and the remote
iterator which drives these collections on our
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#remotecache_keyset_entryset_values[user
guide]. ##

[.blob-code-inner]#[.pl-c]#We hope you find that this improves your
usage of RemoteCaches in the future by allowing you to have backed
collections that also allow you to use the improvements of Java 8 with
Streams.##

[.blob-code-inner]#[.pl-c]#If you have yet you can acquire Infinispan
9.1.1 or the latest stable version at http://infinispan.org/download/##
