---
layout: blog
title: First steps with Vert.x and Infinispan PUSH API (Part 2)
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/first-steps-with-vertx-and-infinispan-push-api
date: '2017-12-14T11:11:00.000-08:00'
author: Katia Aresti
tags: [ "reactive", "listeners", "vert.x", "push api", "react" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-885985137699815698
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2017/12/first-steps-with-vertx-and-infinispan-push-api.html
---
Welcome to the second in a multi-part series of blog posts about
creating http://vertx.io/[Eclipse Vert.x] applications
with http://infinispan.org/[Infinispan]. In the
http://blog.infinispan.org/2017/12/first-steps-with-vertx-and-infinispan-rest-api.html[previous
blog post] we have seen how to create a REST API. The purpose of this
tutorial is to showcase how to create a PUSH API implemented with
Vert.x and using Infinispan as a server.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_All the code of this tutorial is available in this
https://github.com/karesti/cute-names[GitHub repository]. The backend is
a Java project using Maven, so all the needed dependencies can be found
in the pom.xml. The front is a super simple react application._
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

== PUSH API

Creating a REST API is very straightforward. But today, even if we are
heavily using REST, we don't always want to use request/response or
polling, but instead we want to push directly from the server to the
client. In this example, we are going to create an API that pushes every
new value inserted in the default cache of Infinispan. These values are
cute names, as we did in the REST API example.

We are using two features here :

* Infinispan client listeners
* Vert.x bridge between the
http://vertx.io/docs/vertx-core/java/#event_bus[Event Bus] and the
browser

http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#_Listeners_and_notifications_section[Infinispan
Listeners] provide a way to the client get notified when something
happens in a cache.

The http://vertx.io/docs/vertx-web/java/#_sockjs_event_bus_bridge[Event
Bus Bridge] that connects to the browser,
uses http://sockjs.org/[SockJS]. SockJS is a JavaScript library that
provides a WebSocket API, but it can be used with browsers that don't
support web-sockets (see the website of the project for more detailed
information). Vert.x supports this library and creates a bridge between
your browser and your back-end easily through the Event Bus.


=== Creating an Event Bus bridge


Vert.x is a reactive framework, which means that uses
https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava[RxJava] too, and provides a fancy
API on top of it.

First, we are going to create a new verticle called SendCuteNamesAPI.
This verticle extends the CacheAccessVerticle we created in the
http://blog.infinispan.org/2017/12/first-steps-with-vertx-and-infinispan-rest-api.html[previous
blog post]. CacheAccessVerticle initialises the connection with
Infinispan using the
http://infinispan.org/docs/dev/user_guide/user_guide.html#using_hot_rod_server[Hot
Rod protocol.]

Now we need to create a SocketJSHandler. This handler has a method
called bridge, where we configure some BridgeOptions. Obviously *we
don't want the client to be able to read everything* traveling on the
event bus, and this won't happen. We *configure an address*,
*'cute-names'*, and we add the permission to read and write to this
address.

This handler is passed to the event bus route, where the path
is /eventbus/*.

Finally, we create a http server as we did in the REST API example. The
difference is that instead of calling listen method, we call *rxListen*
and *subscribe*.





=== Getting notified and publishing


Using
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#_Listeners_and_notifications_section[Infinispan
listeners] is very easy.

First, we are going to create a class that has
the @ClientListener annotation. The client listener has to be added to
the cache client configuration. We add a protected method
called addConfigToCache that will be called just after the
initialisation of the defaultCache in the abstract CacheAccessVerticle.
Verticles extending the abstract class can now add custom configuration
to the client.

We want to be notified when a new entry is created. In this case, our
listener has to contain a method with the @ClientCacheEntryCreated
annotation on it. The signature of the method has to include a
ClientCacheEntryCreatedEvent<String> parameter. This parameter will hold
the 'key' of the entry that has been created.

Finally, we use the key to retrieve the name using the getAsync method
and then *publish* the value in the** Vert.x event bus** to the
**address **where the *socket listener* is permitted to read
*: cute-names*.



Now we can run the main method and whenever we post a new name, we will
see in the logs that the client listener is notified!






=== Client code


We are going to create a super simple react application that will just
display hello. React community is *huge*, so there are lot's of
tutorials out there to create a hello world client application. This
application has a single component that displays "Hello".

The react application runs calling npm install and npm start 
in http://localhost:9000/.

Now we need to connect the client to the backend with
*SockJS*.** **Vert.x provides a JavaScript library for
that: https://www.npmjs.com/package/vertx3-eventbus-client[vertx3-eventbus-client],
built on top of SockJS. We create an EventBus object that will connect
to *http://localhost:8082/eventbus* as we configured in the
SendCuteNamesAPI. We register a handler on the *'cute-names'* address.
The body of the message will contain the new cute name published in the
event bus. Every time the handler is called, we update the component's
state, and it will be rendered.





== Wrap up

We have learned how to create PUSH APIs with Vert.x, powered by
Infinispan. The repository has some unit tests. Feedback is more than
welcome to improve the code and the provided examples. I hope you
enjoyed this tutorial ! On the next tutorials we will talk about
https://github.com/vert-x3/vertx-infinispan[Infinispan as the cluster
manager for Vert.x]. Stay tuned !


