---
layout: blog
title: Distributed iteration improvements
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/distributed-iteration-improvements
date: '2018-02-19T03:00:00.000-08:00'
author: Unknown
tags: [ " performance", "streams", "distribution", "iteration" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-7355108497333904806
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2018/02/distributed-iteration-improvements.html
---
Infinispan hasn't always provided a way for iterating upon entries in a
distributed cache. In fact the
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-4222[first iteration] wasn't until
Infinispan 7. Then in Infinispan 8, with the addition of Java 8, we
fully integrated this into
http://blog.infinispan.org/2015/09/distributed-streams.html[distributed
streams], which brought some minor iteration improvements in
performance.

We are proud to announce that with Infinispan 9.2 there are even more
improvements. This contains no API changes, although those will surely
come in the future. This one is purely for performance and
utilization.


== New implementation details

===  

There are a few different aspects that have been changed.  A lot of
these revolve around the amount of entries being retrieved at once,
which if you are familiar with DistributedStreams can be configured via
the
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.2/apidocs/org/infinispan/BaseCacheStream.html#distributedBatchSize-int-[distributedBatchSize]
method. Note that if this is not specified it defaults to the
https://docs.jboss.org/infinispan/9.2/apidocs/org/infinispan/configuration/cache/StateTransferConfigurationBuilder.html#chunkSize-int-[chunk
size] in state transfer.

==== Entry retrieval is now pull based instead of push

Infinispan core (embedded) has added
https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava/tree/2.x[rxjava2] and
https://github.com/reactive-streams/reactive-streams-jvm[reactive
streams] as dependencies and rewrote all of the old push style iterator
code over to pull style to fully utilize the Publisher and Subscriber
interfaces.

With this we only pull up to the batchSize in entries at a time from any
set of nodes. The old style utilized push with call stack blocking,
which could return up two times the amount of entries. Also since we
aren't performing call stack blocking, we don't have to waste threads as
these calls to retrieve entries are done async and finish very quickly
irrespective of user interaction. The old method required multiple
threads to be reserved for this purpose.

==== Streamed batches

The responses from a remote node are written directly to the output
stream so there are no intermediate collections allocated. This means we
only have to iterate upon the data once as we retain the iterator
between requests. On the originator we still have to store the batches
in a collection to be enqueued for the user to pull.

==== Rewritten Parallel Distribution

Great care was taken to implement parallel distribution in a way to
vastly reduce contention and ensure that we properly follow the
batchSize configuration.

When parallel distribution is in use the new implementation will start 4
remote node requests sharing the batch size (so each one gets 1/4). This
way we can guarantee that we only have the desired size irrespective of
the number of nodes in the cluster. The old implementation would request
batchSize from all nodes at the same time. So not only did it reserve a
thread for node but could easily swamp your JVM memory, causing
OutOfMemoryErrors (which no one likes). The latter alone made us force
the default to be sequential distribution when using an iterator.

The old implementation would write entries from all nodes (including
local) to the same shared queue. The new implementation has a different
queue for each request, which allows for faster queues with no locking
to be used.

Due to these changes and other isolations between threads, we can now
make parallel distribution the default setting for the iterator method.
And as you will see this has improved performance nicely.


== Performance


We have written a http://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jmh/[JMH]
test harness specifically for this blog post, testing 9.1.5.Final
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan/releases/tag/9.1.5.Final[build]
against latest 9.2.0.SNAPSHOT. The test runs by default with 4GB of heap
with 6 nodes in a distributed cache with 2 owners. It has varying entry
count, entry sizes and distributed batch sizes.

Due to the variance in each test a large number of tests were ran and
with different permutations to make sure it covered a large amount of
test cases. The JMH test that was ran can be found at
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan-benchmarks/tree/master/iteration[github].
All the default settings were used for the run except -t4 (runs with 4
worker threads) was provided. This was all ran on my measly laptop
(i7-4810MQ and 16 GB) - maxing out the CPU was not a hard task.

*CAVEAT*: The tests don't do anything with the iterator and just try to
pull them as fast as they can. Obviously if you have a lot of processing
done between iterations you will likely not see as good of a performance
increase.

The entire results can be found
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18v8e6vG-4aX8Pk-ihB3p1H5cQvsSQlFMhQSKxPhSLf0/edit?usp=sharing[here].
It shows each permutation and how many operations per second and finds
the difference (green shows 5% or more and red shows -5% or less).




[cols=",,",options="header" ]
|=======================================================================
|Operation |Average Gain |Code
|Specified Distribution Mode |3.5%
|.entrySet().stream().sequentialDistribution.iterator()

|Default |11% |.entrySet().iterator()

|No Rehash |14% |.entrySet().stream().disableRehashAware().iterator()
|=======================================================================


The above 3 rows show a few different ways you could have been invoking
the iterator method. The second row is probably by far the most used
case. In this case you should see around a *11*% increase in performance
(results will vary). This is due to the new pulling method as well as
parallel distribution becoming the new default running mode. It is
unlikely a user was using the other 2 methods, but are provided for a
more complete view.

If you were specifying a distribution mode manually, either sequential
or distribution you will only see a few percent faster run (*3.5*%), but
every little bit helps! Also if you can switch to parallel you may want
to think about doing so.

Also you can see if you were running with rehash disabled prior, it has
even more gains (*14*%). Those don't even include the fact that no
rehash was *28*% faster than with before (which means it is about *32*%
faster in general now). So if you can get away with a _at most once_
guarantee, disabling rehash will provide the best throughput.


== Whats next? 


As was mentioned this is not exposed to the user directly. You still
interact with the iterator as you would normally. We should remedy this
at some point.

=== Expose new method

We would love to eventually expose a method to return a Publisher
directly to the user so that they can get the full benefits of having a
pull based implementation underneath.


This way any intermediate operations applied to the stream before would
be distributed and anything applied to the Publisher would be done
locally. And just like the iterator method this publisher would be fully
rehash aware if you have it configured to do so and would make sure you
get all entries delivered in an _exactly once_ fashion (rehash disabled
guarantees _at most once_).

Another side benefit is that the Subscriber methods could be called on
different threads so there is no overhead required on the ISPN side for
coordinating these into queue(s). Thus the Subscriber _should_ be able
to retrieve all entries faster than just doing an iterator.

=== Java 9 Flow

Also many of you may be wondering why we aren't using the new Flow API
introduced in Java 9. Luckily the Flow API is a 1:1 conversion of
reactive streams. So whenever Infinispan will start supporting Java 9
interfaces/classes, we hope to properly expose these as the JDK
classes.


=== Segment Based Iteration 

With Infinispan 9.3, we hope to introduce
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-5451[data container] and
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-6026[cache store] segment aware
iteration. This means when iterating over either we would only have to
process entries that map to a given segment. This should reduce the time
and processing for iteration substantially, especially for cache stores.
Keep your eyes out for a future blog post detailing these as 9.3
development commences.

=== Give us Feedback

We hope you find a bit more performance when working with your
distributed iteration. Also we value any feedback on what you want our
APIs to look like or find any bugs. As always let us know at any of the
places listed http://infinispan.org/community/[here].
