---
layout: blog
title: 'Data Container Changes Part 3 '
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/data-container-changes-part-3
date: '2018-02-07T23:00:00.000-08:00'
author: wburns
tags: [ " off-heap", "eviction", "configuration" ]
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-402072241702515040
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2018/02/data-container-changes-part-3.html
---
Just over a year ago we detailed some improvements to the data
container, including the availability of Off Heap storage in
http://blog.infinispan.org/2017/01/data-container-changes-part-2.html[part
2]. There have been quite a
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/ISPN-8454?jql=project%20%3D%20ISPN%20AND%20resolution%20%3D%20Done%20AND%20component%20%3D%20%22Off%20Heap%22[few
fixes] for Off Heap especially around memory size estimations with
Infinispan 9.2. There is also a brand new "eviction" strategy that has a
bit of a twist.


== Eviction Strategy Resurrected


Some of you may have remembered that Infinispan used to have an eviction
strategy. This was originally used to decide what eviction algorithm was
used, such as LRU or LIRS. This was removed when the new data container
was introduced. Well... it is back again, but it will be used for a
slightly different purpose.

The eviction strategy still has *NONE* & *MANUAL* which are exactly the
same as before.


=== Remove strategy


There is a new *REMOVE* strategy that is configured by default if
eviction size is greater than 0. This strategy essentially enables
eviction and removes old entries as new ones are inserted.


=== Exception strategy


We have a brand new "eviction" strategy that provides new functionality.
It is unique in that it doesn't really evict, but rather prevent entries
from being inserted.Â  This is the *EXCEPTION* strategy which blocks new
entries from being inserted (or updated if they exceed memory size) by
throwing a ContainerFullException when the size is reached.

This strategy only works on transactional caches that always have 2
phase commit enabled. This can be useful if you want to always have only
so many entries and to give priority to currently inserted entries. This
strategy has better performance than *REMOVE* since it doesn't have to
bookkeep all entries to know what to remove as well.

Note this strategy works across all storage types: OBJECT, BINARY and
OFFHEAP and works with both MEMORY and SIZE based "eviction types. This
makes it just as flexible as the *REMOVE* eviction strategy and hope it
finds some uses by people.


=== How to Configure EXCEPTION Strategy


This is how you can enable MEMORY based EXCEPTION "eviction" using xml
configuration.

This is how you configure the same thing but programmatically.



== Off Heap Memory Size Allocations & Estimations


Before the off heap memory based eviction only counted the allocated
memory chunks for the stored entries themselves. This unfortunately
meant that the size estimate is a bit less than what it should have
been. There are a few things that we improved since then, including
reducing the overhead of our allocations. Note all of the below things
require no configuration changes and users should just get the
benefits.


=== Reduced per object overhead


Prior the overhead for immutable entries with eviction, Infinispan
itself use to allocate 2 chunks of memory with one being 28 bytes and
adding 8 bytes to the actual object. Now we only allocate an additional
16 bytes to the object memory block itself (saving the extra allocation
and requiring less on the object) when using eviction. Due to memory
allocation overhead this saves much more than the 20 bytes as the
allocator also has its own overhead.

We also shaved off 4 bytes off of all entries if expiration was not
used, meaning overhead for an immutable cache entry without eviction
only requires 21 bytes of overhead from ISPN when using off heap
(retained in the same allocation block).


=== Per allocation memory sizing estimations


Internally ISPN allocates a new chunk of memory for each object. This is
done currently to leverage the underlying OS allocator to handle
features such as fragmentation or compaction (if the allocator does so).
Unfortunately this means that each object has its own overhead from the
allocator. Thus we now take that into account when estimating the memory
used by adding 8 bytes overhead and aligning to 16 bytes. This seems to
be a pretty common way for allocators to work. If possible we could
allow for tweaking these values, but they are hard coded currently.


=== Accounting for Address Count


As was mentioned in the prior blog post about off heap, we allocate a
single block of memory to hold address counters for our lookups when
using Off Heap. Unfortunately we didn't account for that in the memory
eviction count. We now account for that in the eviction mechanism, thus
your memory eviction size must be greater than the address count rounded
up to the nearest power of 2, multiplied by 8. What a mouthful...


=== Wrap up


Off heap has been overhauled quite a bit to try to reduce memory usage,
fix bugs and more accurately estimate the memory used. We hope that
along with the new eviction strategy are welcome additions to various
applications.

Please make sure to contact us if you have any feedback, find any bugs
or have any questions! You can get in contact with various places listed
on our http://infinispan.org/community/[website].

