---
layout: blog
title: 'Segmented Data Containers: Distributed Stream Performance Boost'
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/segmented-data-containers-distributed
date: '2018-10-02T11:11:00.000-07:00'
author: wburns
tags: [ " streams", "segmented", "data container", "performance" ]
thumbnail: https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-5FopP39_Z6k/W7O94C_HrAI/AAAAAAAAeDM/xWnwzer_RP8gQBlZvDI5MOY-Qroof7S_gCLcBGAs/s72-c/NonSegmentedData.jpg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-3069540324882598954
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2018/10/segmented-data-containers-distributed.html
---
Welcome to the first of several blog posts that describe the
segmentation of containers that Infinispan uses to store data. Some of
you may have noticed in the previous
https://blog.infinispan.org/2018/06/infinispan-930final-is-out.html[9.3.0.Final
notes] that we announced a new feature named “Segmented On-Heap Data
Container”. We also mentioned that “It improves performance of stream
operations”, but what does that really mean?


== What is a segmented data container and why does it matter? 


Imagine a cluster of 4 nodes in distributed mode (numOwners = 2) with
entries for k0 - k13. It might look like this:


https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-5FopP39_Z6k/W7O94C_HrAI/AAAAAAAAeDM/xWnwzer_RP8gQBlZvDI5MOY-Qroof7S_gCLcBGAs/s1600/NonSegmentedData.jpg[image:https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-5FopP39_Z6k/W7O94C_HrAI/AAAAAAAAeDM/xWnwzer_RP8gQBlZvDI5MOY-Qroof7S_gCLcBGAs/s640/NonSegmentedData.jpg[image,width=640,height=568]]




The data is distributed between the nodes with only two copies of each
entry available. However, the data itself is stored internally in the
same Map instance. As a result, when performing operations on all
entries in the cache, Infinispan must iterate over the same data
multiple times. This degrades performance.

As of Infinispan 9.3, a segmented data container is available to
separate data by segments. Although only on-heap bounded and unbounded
implementations are currently available.

With a segmented data container, that same data set might look like
this:


https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-7S1k7hNmrHI/W7O99geUbkI/AAAAAAAAeDQ/k5tbJq0w22ovQxpNG2uXcMIV63HIvz4MQCLcBGAs/s1600/SegmentedData.jpg[image:https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-7S1k7hNmrHI/W7O99geUbkI/AAAAAAAAeDQ/k5tbJq0w22ovQxpNG2uXcMIV63HIvz4MQCLcBGAs/s640/SegmentedData.jpg[image,width=640,height=562]]




Because Infinispan internally reasons on data in terms of segments, a
segmented data container lets Infinispan process data only in specific
segments. This allows for operations performed upon all entries to
require iteration over the data only once.


== Actual Performance Difference


So with the above example you might be thinking that the performance
increase maximum is two times throughput, since numOwners is two. This
is close, but not quite correct. While iterating on the data we also
have to determine what segment an entry belongs to. With a segmented
container we know this already, so there is no need to calculate that.
This provides additional performance, as you will see.

The following graphs were generated using the benchmark at
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan-benchmarks/tree/master/iteration.
The following command was run: *java -jar target/benchmarks.jar
-pvalueObjectSize=1000 -pentryAmount=50000 -pbatchSize=4096*

*[#docs-internal-guid-9b20945e-7fff-7241-2261-95b975ba8902]#image:https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/XMXQWsWISdPTt-93vLV5RgnJld-ASxkiWaXDZ-O1guXkoe87fYj1Ra2mlQHfcnTmVlXKNTZhk5T095pL99PjqlHgCbqlpFLyvQoTSBarR65wO275T7syowLSBxZl8syWKSYF9H43[image,title="Chart",width=624,height=385]#*

The preceding graph is the result of the iteration methods. As you can
notice the performance increase isn’t that much… why not?!?

Unfortunately, remote iteration requires a lot of network overhead, so
we don’t get to see the full benefits of segmentation. But at least it
is about 5-12% faster, not too shabby.

Now to show the real improvement, here is the chart showing the
performance increase for the Cache#size operation:

[#docs-internal-guid-413b551a-7fff-9931-559d-9fda906ad6b1]#image:https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/HHbRs5_4t4jE_7j8l3ArlsuPCgFXjh7zZXLGJXo3e9LLOP-matr7qTGzLiH8RpW9at1IimMrtC-LNKSsQmAujhMjVXxj31ruTGfEHeP9J-rTpUIFo0WjoyY_NCezBD6WtUj2NVgy[image,title="Chart",width=624,height=385]#

If you notice there is *huge* increase in performance: almost a three
fold increase over the non-segmented container, even though numOwners is
only two. The old segment calculation adds a bit of overhead compared to
just incrementing a number.

So keep in mind this change will show a larger gain in performance if
the result returned is smaller, especially if it is a fixed size, such
as a single int for Cache#size.


== What about gets and puts?


Having the container segmented should also affect get and put
performance as well, right? In testing the difference for get and puts
are less than one percent, in favor of segmentation due to some
optimizations we were able to add.


== How do I enable this?


So the performance gains are noticeable, especially when the remote
operation returns a small data set. But how can a user configure this?
This is the nice part, due to no performance loss with other operations
the container will always be segmented as long as the cache mode
supports segmentation. That is if it is a Distributed, Replicated or
Scattered cache.


== A real-life example and closing


Since this feature has been around a while already, we actually have
users gaining benefits from this feature. An example can be found at
https://developer.jboss.org/message/983837#983837. In this case the user
only upgraded to Infinispan 9.3 and received over a three-fold increase
in performance when using distributed streams. It actually starts to
bring distributed streams performance within range of indexed query for
some use cases.

So, by upgrading your application to Infinispan 9.3 or newer, you will
benefit from these improvements. There will be future posts regarding
segmentation, including support for stores. Either way please feel free
to http://infinispan.org/download/[download Infinispan],
https://issues.jboss.org/projects/ISPN[report bugs],
https://infinispan.zulipchat.com/[chat with us], ask questions on the
https://developer.jboss.org/en/infinispan/content[forum] or on
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/?tagnames=infinispan&sort=newest[StackOverflow].
