---
layout: blog
title: Clustering Vert.x with Infinispan
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/clustering-vertx-with-infinispan
date: '2018-03-21T13:08:00.000-07:00'
author: karesti
tags: [ " vert.x" ]
thumbnail: https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-wNPoumRNOZU/WqqNdMdm6mI/AAAAAAAACNM/Nvrirnuw-ok_BfS8Gh7DaomoTGhdEwk-ACLcBGAs/s72-c/dummyApp.png
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5717179571414330874.post-4888487643017555573
blogger_orig_url: https://blog.infinispan.org/2018/03/clustering-vertx-with-infinispan.html
---
Welcome to the third in a multi-part series of blog posts about creating
Eclipse Vert.x applications with Infinispan. In the previous blog posts
we have seen how to create
https://infinispan.org/blog/2017/12/12/first-steps-with-vertx-and-infinispan-rest-api[REST]
and
https://infinispan.org/blog/2017/12/14/first-steps-with-vertx-and-infinispan-push-api[PUSH]
APIs using the
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/server_guide/server_guide.html[Infinispan
Server]. The purpose of this tutorial is to showcase how to create
clustered http://vertx.io/[Vert.x] applications using Infinispan in
embedded mode.



== Why Infinispan ?


Infinispan can be used for http://infinispan.org/about/[several use
cases]. Among them we find that it can be used as the underlying
framework to cluster your applications. Infinispan uses peer-to-peer
communication between nodes, so the architecture is not based on
master/slave mode and there is no single point of failure. Infinispan
supports replication and resilience across data centers, is fast and
reliable. All the http://infinispan.org/features/[features] that make
this datagrid a great product, make it a great cluster manager. If you
need to create clustered applications or microservices, this can be
achieved with http://vertx.io/docs/#clustering[Vert.x] using
the http://vertx.io/docs/vertx-infinispan/java/[Vert.x-Infinispan
cluster manager].



== Creating a clustered application


The code of this tutorial is available
https://github.com/infinispan-demos/vertx-api/tree/master/clustered[here].


=== Dummy Application


Let’s start with a dummy clustered system with 3 verticles.



https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-wNPoumRNOZU/WqqNdMdm6mI/AAAAAAAACNM/Nvrirnuw-ok_BfS8Gh7DaomoTGhdEwk-ACLcBGAs/s1600/dummyApp.png[image:https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-wNPoumRNOZU/WqqNdMdm6mI/AAAAAAAACNM/Nvrirnuw-ok_BfS8Gh7DaomoTGhdEwk-ACLcBGAs/s640/dummyApp.png[image,width=640,height=275]]



==== WebService Status Producer

Produces randomly [0,1,2] values every 1000 milliseconds and sends them
to the event bus *"ids"* address.





==== Reboot Consumer

Consumes messages from the event bus *"ids"* address, and launches
a *"reboot"* that lasts for 3000 milliseconds whenever the value is 0.
If a reboot is already happening, we don’t need to relaunch any new
reboot. When a reboot starts or ends, a message is sent to the event bus
to the *"reboot"* address.

Notice that:

* We use a simple boolean to check if there is a reboot going on. This
is safe because every verticle is executed from a single event loop
thread, so there won’t be multiple threads executing the code at the
same time.
* An ID is generated to identify the Verticle. The message sent to the
event bus is a JsonObject





==== Monitoring

Consumes monitoring messages from the event bus *"reboot"* address and
logs them.





=== Clustering the dummy Application


To create a cluster of these applications, we just need to do 2
things:


. Add the cluster manager maven dependency.
 
. Run and deploy each verticle in cluster mode. Each Verticle class has
a main method that deploys each verticle separetly. Example for the
Monitoring verticle.



[cols="^" ]
|=======================================================================
|https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-GjOWQzixVq8/Wpgynw-A8OI/AAAAAAAACLQ/EUz57xgYcjcve1jXrARPEufaOLfLErUDwCEwYBhgL/s1600/Monitoring.png[image:https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-GjOWQzixVq8/Wpgynw-A8OI/AAAAAAAACLQ/EUz57xgYcjcve1jXrARPEufaOLfLErUDwCEwYBhgL/s320/Monitoring.png[image,width=320,height=296]]

|Running the application, we can monitor the logs
|=======================================================================

Each clustered application contains - or embeds - an Infinispan
instance. Under the hood, the 3 Infinispan instances will form a
cluster.



== What if I need to scale


Imagine you need to scale the Reboot Consumer application. We can run it
multiple times, let’s say 2 more times. The two new instances will join
the cluster. In this case, we have “ID-93EB” ”ID-45B8” and “ID-247A”, so
now we have a cluster of 5. It's very simple but if we have a look to
the monitoring console, we will notice reboots are now happening in
parallel.


[cols="^" ]
|=======================================================================
|https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-YTja7FV8S4k/Wpg6YuIstTI/AAAAAAAACL4/xH2N4erfgfk_ZUcICwmyp_2WQQNKlPpqQCLcBGAs/s1600/MultipleReboots.png[image:https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-YTja7FV8S4k/Wpg6YuIstTI/AAAAAAAACL4/xH2N4erfgfk_ZUcICwmyp_2WQQNKlPpqQCLcBGAs/s400/MultipleReboots.png[image,width=400,height=245]]

|3 Reboot Consumers
|=======================================================================



As I mentioned before, this example is a dummy application. But in real
life you could need to trigger a process from a verticle that runs
multiple times and need to be sure this process is happening just once
at a time. How can we fix this ? We can use Vert.x Shared Data
structures API.


=== Shared data API to rescue


In this particular case, we are going to use a clustered lock. Using the
lock, we can now synchronise the reboots among the 3 nodes.




[cols="^" ]
|=======================================================================
|https://2.bp.blogspot.com/--calcYXn5l4/WplAZEu4f8I/AAAAAAAACMU/eFrivRZMsHE8XUZr-BAvAuUikZ9-_k3DACLcBGAs/s1600/MonitoringUsingLock.png[image:https://2.bp.blogspot.com/--calcYXn5l4/WplAZEu4f8I/AAAAAAAACMU/eFrivRZMsHE8XUZr-BAvAuUikZ9-_k3DACLcBGAs/s400/MonitoringUsingLock.png[image,width=400,height=256]]

|Using Shared Data API, one reboot at a time
|=======================================================================


Vert.x clustered lock in this example is using an emulated version of
the new Clustered Lock API of Infinispan introduced in 9.2 which has
been freshly released. I will come back to share about this API in
particular in further blog posts. You can read about it on the
http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#clustered_lock[documentation]
or run the
https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan-simple-tutorials/tree/master/lock[infinispan-simple-tutorial].


=== One node at a time


When clustering applications with Vert.x, there is something you need to
take care of. It is important to understand that each node contains an
instance of the datagrid. This means that scaling up and down needs to
be done one at a time. Infinispan, as other datagrids, reshuffles the
data when a new node joins or leaves a cluster. This process is done
following a distributed hashing algorithm, so not every data is moved
around, just the data that is supposed to live in the new node, or the
data owned by a leaving node. If we just kill a bunch of nodes without
taking care of the cluster, consequences can be harming! This is
something quite obvious when dealing with databases : we just don’t kill
a bunch of database instances without taking care of every instance at a
time. Even when Infinispan data is only in memory we need to take care
about it in the same
way. http://vertx.io/docs/vertx-infinispan/java/#_configuring_for_kubernetes_or_openshift_3[Openshift,
which is built on top of Kubernetes], helps dealing properly and safely
with these scale up and down operations.



== Conclusions


As you have seen, creating clustered applications with Vert.x and
Infinispan is very straightforward. The clustered event bus is very
powerful. In this example we have seen how to use a clustered lock, but
other
http://vertx.io/docs/apidocs/io/vertx/core/shareddata/SharedData.html[shared
data structures] built on top
of http://infinispan.org/docs/stable/user_guide/user_guide.html#the_code_strongcounter_code_interface_when_the_consistency_or_bounds_matters[Counters]
are available.



== About the Vert.x Infinispan Cluster Manager status


At the time of this writing,
http://blog.infinispan.org/2018/02/infinispan-920final.html[Infinspan
9.2.0.Final] has been released. From vert.x-infinispan cluster manager
point of view, before Vert.x 3.6 (which is not out yet) the cluster
manager is using Infinispan 9.1.6.final and it’s using an emulation
layer for locks and counters. In this tutorial we are using Vert.x 3.5.1
version.

This tutorial will be updated with the version using Infinispan 9.2 as
soon as the next
https://github.com/vert-x3/vertx-infinispan/[vert.x-infinispan] will be
released, which will happen in a few months. Meanwhile, stay tuned!

